ACTING

ACTING THE FIRST SIX LESSONS RICHARD BOLESLAVSKY A THEATRE ARTS BOOK  ROUTLEDGE NEW YORK AND LONDON

A Theatre Arts Book Published by Routledge 29 West 35th Street New York, NY 10001 www.routledge-ny.com Published in Great Britain by Routledge 11 New Fetter Lane London EC4P 4EE www.routledge.co.uk Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group. This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. “To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.” Copyright © 1933 by Theatre Arts Books, Inc. Copyright © 1949 by Norma Boleslavsky All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Boleslavsky, Richard, 1889–1937. Acting : the first six lessons/Richard Boleslavsky.

p. cm.—(A Theatre Arts book) ISBN 0-87830-000-7 (alk. paper) 1. Acting. I. Title. II. Series. PN2061 .B55 2003 792 ′ .028–dc21 2002153023 iv  ISBN 0-203-49288-9 Master e-book ISBN ISBN 0-203-59119-4 (Adobe eReader Format)

CONTENTS Introduction   vi The First Lesson:   CONCENTRATION   1 The Second Lesson: MEMORY OF EMOTION 15 The Third Lesson: DRAMATIC ACTION   36 The Fourth Lesson: CHARACTERIZATION   52 The Fifth Lesson:   OBSERVATION   77 The Sixth Lesson: RHYTHM   92

INTRODUCTION The   Way of the Lancer   brought immediate literary   acclaim   to   Richard   Boleslavski, spelled with an “i” after the manner of his Polish ancestors. The book was variously called a work of genius, the best human document   of   the   events   preceding   the Russian Revolution, a masterly narrative biography, a new writing of history. But no matter   what   else   critics   said   of   it,   they almost   invariably   added   that   it   was intensely dramatic, obviously the work of a mind trained in the theatre. As rightly they might say, for the uniform of an officer of the Polish Lancers and the change from “y” to   “i”   was   no   disguise   for   Richard Boleslavsky, an actor of the Moscow Art Theatre,   Director   of   the   Moscow   Art Theatre Studio and, in America, Director of the   Laboratory   Theatre,   of   many successful plays on Broadway, of films in Hollywood. What many of the critics seemed to miss, however,   in   this   splendid   book   and   its sequel,   Lances   Down,   was   the   fact   that

Boleslavsky’s   style   and   point   of   view, dramatic as it undoubtedly was, had little to do with the art of the writer of plays.  Way of the Lancer   was not the product of a dramatist’s mind, turned narrator, but of an   actor’s   mind.   One   is   almost   the converse of the other. The actor is usually word-shy and inarticulate. Often he does not know what it is he does or how he does it, that makes him an actor. Even when he knows, it is difficult for him to say it or write it. He can only express it in action. His language is a language of movement, of   gesture,   of   voice,   of   the   creation   and projection of character by things done or left undone. The dramatist, on the other hand,   works   easily   with   words,   writes fluently,   interprets   character,   situation, and events, manner and method in his own terms. So far as the art and the craft of acting   have   been   written   of   at   all,   it   is usually the dramatist or the critic who has written of them. That is why there is so little in print really to explain the actor to himself and to his fellows. Talma,   Fanny   Kemble,   Coquelin   and, among   the   moderns,   Louis   Calvert   and Stanislavsky stand out as actors who have tried to interpret acting. But Stanislavsky’s fine contribution is welded into the text of his autobiography,   My Life in Art,   and all the rest are, generally speaking, an effort to create a philosophy of acting rather than to analyze the elements of the art of acting or to establish a technique for the player. vii

Must   an   actor   have   experienced   an emotion   to   portray   it;   will   he   portray   it better   if   he   actually   renews   the   feeling every time he assumes it; shall acting be far removed from life, or as close to it as possible?   Such   are   the   problems   these actor-philosophers set themselves to solve. And with the illustrations drawn from high experience,   their   writings   have   greatly illumined the field. They have clarified the fundamental   laws   of   the   art   for   many artists. But they do not help an actor to learn the elements of his craft. So   that,   in   a   way,   these   essays   of Boleslavsky’s,   these   First   Lessons   in Acting,   in   dialogue   form,   stand   alone   in their field. Gayly as they are told, there is not   a   word   in   any   of   them   that   is   not seriously   to   the   point,   that   is   not calculated, out of long years of work and study as an actor and as a director in the professional and in the art theatre, to help a young actor on his way. They actually select his tools for him and show him how to use them. And that is a grateful task. For while an actor’s tools are all within his own body and mind and spirit, they are by their very nearness harder to isolate and put to special use than tools of wood and iron.   Concentration   and   observation, experience   and   memory,   movement   and poise,   creation   and   projection—an   actor must make them all the servants of his talent. viii

In an article he wrote some years ago on the   Fundamentals   of   Acting,   Boleslavsky himself defined the field he covers here. “The   actor’s   art,”   he   said,   “cannot   be taught. He must be born with ability; but the   technique,   through   which   his   talent can find expression—that can and must be taught. An appreciation of this fact is of the   utmost   importance,   not   only   to students of acting but to every actor who is interested in the perfection of his art. For, after all, technique is something which is perfectly   realistic   and   quite   possible   to make one’s own.” The   basis   of   this   technique,   the   mere development   of   the   actor’s   physical resources,   although   he   recognizes   and stresses   its   importance,   is   not   what Boleslavsky calls “technique.” The training of the body he likens rather to the tuning up   of   an   instrument.   “Even   the   most perfectly tuned violin,” he goes on to say, “will   not   play   by   itself,   without   the musician to make it sing. The equipment of the ideal actor…is not complete unless he   has…the   technique   of   an   ‘emotion maker’ or creator; unless he can follow the advice of Joseph Jefferson to ‘Keep your heart warm and your head cool’. Can it be done?   Most   certainly!   It   is   merely necessary to think of life as an unbroken sequence of two different kinds of steps…. Problem steps and Action steps…. The first step is for the actor to understand what the problem is that confronts him. Then ix

the spark of the will pushes him toward dynamic action…. When an actor realizes that   the   solution   of   a   certain   part   may consist merely in being able first, to stand on the stage for perhaps no more than one- five-hundredth   of   a   second,   cool-headed and firm of purpose, aware of the problem before him; and then in the next one-five- hundredth of a second or, it may be, five or ten   seconds,   to   precipitate   himself intensely   into   the   action   which   the situation requires, he will have achieved the perfect technique of acting.” First   to   know   rightly   what   to   do,   and then to do it rightly. That is all. It seems little enough. But it is not by chance that Boleslavsky puts the visits of   The   Creature,  who   is   the   subject   of   these   lessons, months,   sometimes   years,   apart.   He   is thinking   practically,   not   wishfully.   He knows the length of the road she will need to travel between lessons. He knows that in acting more than in any other art a little less than good is worlds away from good. An   actor   cannot   be   made   between luncheon and dinner. He accepts the fact that the profession may take a lifetime of work and that it is a profession well worth the work of a lifetime. EDITH J.R.ISAACS x

THE FIRST LESSON CONCENTRATION  M orning. My room. A knock at the door.  I: Come in.   (The door opens, slowly and timidly.   Enter   a   Pretty   Creature   of eighteen.   She   looks   at   me   with   wide- open ,   frightened   eyes   and   crushes   her handbag   violently.)  THE CREATURE: I… I… I hear that you teach dramatic art. I: No! I am sorry. Art cannot be taught. To possess an art means to possess talent. That is something one has or has not. You can develop it by hard work, but to create a talent is impossible. What I do is to help those who have decided to work on the stage, to develop and to educate themselves for honest and conscientious work in the theatre. THE   CREATURE:   Yes,   of   course.   Please help me. I simply love the theatre. I: Loving the theatre is not enough. Who does not love it? To consecrate oneself to the theatre, to devote one’s entire life to it,   give   it   all   one’s   thought,   all   one’s

emotions! For the sake of the theatre to give up everything, to suffer everything! And more important than all, to be ready to   give   the   theatre   everything—your entire   being—expecting   the   theatre   to give you nothing in return, not the least grain of what seemed to you so beautiful in it and so alluring. THE CREATURE: I know. I played a great deal   at   school.   I   understand   that   the theatre brings suffering. I am not afraid of it. I am ready for anything if I can only play, play, play. I: And suppose the theatre does not want you to play and play and play? THE CREATURE: Why shouldn’t it? I: Because it might not find you talented. THE   CREATURE:   But   when   I   played   at school… I: What did you play? THE CREATURE:   King Lear.  I: What part did you play in this trifle? THE CREATURE: King Lear himself. And all   my   friends   and   our   professor   of literature and even Aunt Mary told me I played wonderfully and that I certainly had talent. I: Pardon me, I don’t mean to criticize the nice people whom you name, but are you sure   that   they   are   connoisseurs   of talent? THE   CREATURE:   Our   professor   is   very strict.   He   himself   worked   with   me   on King Lear. He is a great authority. I: I see, I see. And Aunt Mary? 2 THE FIRST LESSON

THE   CREATURE:   She   met   Mr.   Belasco personally. I: So far, so good. But can you tell me how your   professor,   when   working   on   King Lear, wanted you to play these lines, for instance: “Blow winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage! Blow!” THE CREATURE: Do you want me to play it for you? I: No. Just tell me how you learned to read those   lines.   What   were   you   trying   to attain? THE CREATURE: I had to stand this way, my feet well together, incline my body forward a little, lift my head like this, stretch   out   my   arms   to   heaven   and shake my fists. Then I had to take a deep breath and burst into sarcastic laughter —ha! ha! ha!   (She laughs ,   a charming ,  childish laugh. Only at happy eighteen can one laugh that   way.)   Then, as though cursing   heaven,   as   loud   as   possible pronounce the words: “Blow winds and crack your cheeks! Rage! Blow!” I: Thank you, that is quite enough for a clear understanding of the part of King Lear, as well as for a definition of your talent. May I ask you one more thing? Will you, if you please, say this sentence, first   cursing   the   heavens   and   then without   cursing   them.   Just   keep   the sense   of   the   phrase—only   its   thought.  (She   doesn’t   think   long ,   she   is accustomed to curse heaven.)  CONCENTRATION 3

THE   CREATURE:   When   you   curse   the heavens, you say it this way: “Blooooow wiiiiinds,   and   Craaaaack   your   cheeks, Raaaaage Blooooow.”   (The Creature tries very   hard   to   curse   the   heavens   but through   the   window   I   see   the   azure heavens laughing at the curse. I do the same.)   And without cursing them, I must do it some other way. Well…I don’t know how…Isn’t it funny? Well, this way:   (The Creature   becomes confused and, with a charming smile ,   swallowing the   words ,  hurriedly   pronounces   them   all   on   one note.)  “Blowwindsandcrackyourcheeksrageblo w.”   (She   becomes   completely   confused and   tries   to   destroy   her   handbag.   A pause.)  I: How strange! You are so young; you do not   hesitate   a   second   before   cursing heaven.   Yet   you   are   unable   to   speak these words simply and plainly, to show their inner meaning. You want to play a Chopin Nocturne without knowing where the notes are. You grimace, you mutilate the   words   of   the   poet   and   eternal emotion, and at the same time you do not possess the most elemental quality of a literate man—an ability to transmit the thoughts, feelings, and words of another logically. What right have you to say that you   have   worked   in   the   theatre?   You have destroyed the very conception of the word   Theatre.   (A   pause;   the   Creature looks   at   me   with   the   eyes   of   one  4 THE FIRST LESSON

innocently condemned to death. The little hand-bag lies on the floor.)  THE CREATURE: So I must never play? I: And if I say   Never? (Pause. The eyes of the Creature   change their expression. She looks straight into my soul with   a sharp scrutinizing look, and seeing that I am not joking,   clenches her teeth, and tries in vain to hide what   is happening in her soul. But ‘it is no use. One enormous real tear rolls   out of her eye, and the Creature at that moment becomes   dear to me. It spoils   my   intentions   completely.   She controls   herself, clenches her teeth, and says in a low voice—)  THE CREATURE: But I am going to play. I have nothing else in my life.   (At eighteen they always talk that   way. But just the same I am deeply touched.)  I: All right then. I must tell you that this very   moment   you   did   more   for   the theatre,   or   rather   for   yourself   in   the theatre, than you did in playing all your parts.   You   suffered   just   now;   you   felt deeply.   Those   are   two   things   without which   you   cannot   do   in   any   art   and especially in the art of the theatre. Only by paying this price can you attain the happiness of creation, the happiness of the birth of a new artistic value. To prove that, let us work together right now. Let us try to create a small, but real, artistic value according to your strength. It will be the first step in your development as an actress.   (The enormous, beautiful tear  CONCENTRATION 5

is forgotten. It disap-peared somewhere into   space.   A   charming,   happy   smile appears   instead.   I   never   thought   my creaking   voice   could   produce   such   a change.)  Listen and answer sincerely. Have you ever seen a man, a specialist, busy on some creative problem in the course of his work? A   pilot   on   an   ocean   liner,   for   instance, responsible   for   thousands   of   lives,   or   a biologist working at his microscope, or an architect   working out   the   plan   of   a complicated bridge, or a great actor seen from the wings during his interpretation of a fine part? THE CREATURE: I saw John Barrymore from   the   wings   when   he   was   playing  Hamlet.  I:   What   impressed   you   chiefly   as   you watched him? THE CREATURE: He was   marvelous!!!  I: I know that, but what else? THE CREATURE: He paid no attention to me. I: That is more important; not only not to you but to nothing around him. He was acting in his work as the pilot would, the scientist,   or   the   architect—he   was concentrating.   Remember   this   word  Concentrate.   It is important in every art and especially in the art of the theatre. Concentration   is   the   quality   which 6 THE FIRST LESSON

permits us to direct all our spiritual and intellectual   forces   toward   one   definite object   and   to   continue   as   long   as   it pleases   us   to   do   so—sometimes   for   a time   much   longer   than   our   physical strength can endure. I knew a fisherman once who, during a storm, did not leave his   rudder   for   forty-eight   hours, concentrating to the last minute on his work of steering his schooner. Only when he had brought the schooner back safely into the harbor did he allow his body to faint.   This   strength,   this   certainty   of power over yourself, is the fundamental quality of every creative artist. You must find it within yourself, and develop it to the last degree. THE CREATURE: But how? I:   I   will   tell   you.   Don’t   hurry.   The   most important thing is that in the art of the theatre a special kind of concentration is needed.   The   pilot   has   a   compass,   the scientist   has   his   microscope,   the architect   his   drawings—all   external, visible   objects   of   concentration   and creation.   They   have,   so   to   speak,   a  material   aim, to which all their force is directed. So has a sculptor, a painter, a musician,   an   author.   But   it   is   quite different with the actor. Tell me, what do you   think   is   the   object   of   his concentration? THE CREATURE: His part. I: Yes, until he learns it. But it is only after studying and rehearsing that the actor CONCENTRATION 7

starts   to create. Or rather let us say that at first he creates “searchingly” and on the   opening   night   he   begins   to   create “constructively” in his acting. And what is acting? THE CREATURE: Acting? Acting is when he…acts acts…I don’t know. I: You want to consecrate all your life to a task without knowing what it is? Acting is   the life of the human   soul receiving ‘its birth through art.   In a creative theatre the object for an actor’s concentration is the  human soul.   In the first period of his work —the   searching—the   object   for concentration is his own soul and those of the men and women who surround him.   In   the   second   period—the constructive   one—only   his   own   soul. Which   means   that,   to   act,   you   must know how to concentrate on something materially imperceptible,—on something which   you   can   perceive   only   by penetrating deeply into your own entity, recognizing what would be evidenced in life   only   in   a   moment   of   the   greatest emotion   and   most   violent   struggle.   In other   words,   you   need   a   spiritual concentration on emotions which do not exist, but are invented or imagined. THE CREATURE: But how can one develop in   one-self   something   which   does   not exist. How can one start? I:   From   the   very   beginning.   Not   from   a Chopin Nocturne but from the simplest scales. Such scales are your five senses: 8 THE FIRST LESSON

sight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste. They will be the key of your creation like a scale for a Chopin Nocturne. Learn how to govern this scale, how with your entire being to concentrate on your senses, to make them work artificially, to give them different   problems   and   create   the solutions. THE CREATURE: I hope you don’t mean to say that I don’t even know how to listen or how to feel. I: In life you may know. Nature has taught you a little.   (She becomes very daring and speaks as though challenging the whole world.)  THE CREATURE: No, on the stage, too. I: Is that so? Let us see. Please, just as you are sitting now, listen to the scratching of an imaginary mouse in that corner. THE CREATURE: Where is the audience? I: That doesn’t concern you in the least. Your audience is in no hurry as yet to buy tickets for your performance. Forget about   it.   Do   the   problem   I   give   you. Listen to the scratching of a mouse in that corner. THE CREATURE: All right.   (There follows a helpless   gesture with the right and then the left ear which has nothing in common with listening to the delicate scratching of a   mouse’s paw in the silence.)  I:   All   right.   Now   please   listen   to   a symphony orchestra playing the march from   Aida.   You know the march? THE CREATURE: Of course. CONCENTRATION 9

I:   Please.   (The   same   business   follows— nothing to do   with listening to a triumphal march. I smile. The Creature   begins to understand that something is wrong, and becomes   confused.   She   awaits   my verdict.)   I see you recognize how helpless you are, how little you see the difference between the lower   do   and the higher   do.  THE   CREATURE:   You   give   me   a   very difficult problem. I: Is it easier to curse the heavens in   King Lear?   No,   my   dear,   I   must   tell   you frankly: You do not know how to create the smallest, simplest bit of the life of the human soul. You do not know how to  concentrate spiritually.   Not only do you not   know   how   to   create   complicated feelings   and   emotions   but   you   do   not even   possess   your   own   senses.   All   of that   you   must   learn   by   hard   daily exercises   of   which   I   can   give   you thousands. If you think, you will be able to invent another thousand. THE CREATURE: All right. I will learn. I will do everything you tell me. Will I be an actress then? I: I am glad you ask. Of course you will not be an actress, yet. To listen and to look and to feel truly is not all. You must do all that   in   a   hundred   ways.   Suppose that you are playing. The curtain goes up and your   first   problem   is   to   listen   to   the sound of a departing car. You must do it in such a way that the thousand people in the theatre who at that moment are 10 THE FIRST LESSON

each   concentrating   on   some   particular object—one on the stock exchange, one on home worries, one on politics, one on a dinner or the pretty girl in the next chair —in such a way that they know and feel immediately that their concentration is less important than yours, though you are concentrating only on the sound of a departing imaginary car. They must feel they have not the right to think of the stock exchange in the presence of your imaginary   car!   That   you   are   more powerful   than   they,   that,   for   the moment,   you   are   the   most   important person in the world, and nobody dares disturb you. Nobody dares to disturb a painter at his work, and it is the actor’s own   fault   if   he   allows   the   public   to interfere with his creation. If all actors would possess the concentration and the knowledge of which I speak, this would never happen. THE CREATURE: But what does he need for that? I: Talent and technique. The education of an actor consists of three parts. The first is the education of his body, the whole physical   apparatus,   of   every   muscle and sinew. As a director I can manage very well with an actor with a completely developed body. THE CREATURE: What time must a young actor spend on this? I: An hour and a half daily on the following exercises:   gymnastics,   rhythmic CONCENTRATION 11

gymnastics,   classical   and   interpretive dancing, fencing, all kinds of breathing exercises,   voice-placing   exercises, diction,   singing,   pantomime,   make-up. An hour and a half a day for two years with steady practice afterwards in what you   have   acquired   will   make   an   actor  pleasing to look at.  The   second   part   of   the   education   is intellectual,   cultural.   One   can   discuss Shakespeare,   Molière,   Goethe,   and Calderon only with a cultured actor who knows what these men stand for and what has been done in the theatres of the world to produce their plays. I need an actor who knows the world’s literature and who can see   the   difference   between   German   and French Romanticism. I need an actor who knows the history of painting, of sculpture and of music, who can always carry in his mind, at least approximately, the style of every period, and the individuality of every great painter. I need an actor who has a fairly   clear   idea   of   the psychology   of motion,   of   psychoanalysis,   of   the expression   of   emotion,   and   the   logic   of feeling.   I   need   an   actor   who   knows something of the anatomy of the human body,   as   well   as   of   the   great   works   of sculpture. All this knowledge is necessary because the actor comes in contact with these things, and has to work with them on   the   stage.   This   intellectual   training 12 THE FIRST LESSON

would   make   an   actor   who   could   play   a great variety of parts. The   third   kind   of   education,   the beginning of which I showed you today, is the education and training of the soul—the most important factor of dramatic action. An   actor   cannot   exist   without   a   soul developed   enough   to   be   able   to accomplish, at the first command of the will, every action and change stipulated. In other words, the actor must have a soul capable   of   living   through   any   situation demanded by the author. There is no great actor without such a soul. Unfortunately it is acquired by long, hard work, at great expense   of   time   and   experience,   and through a series of experimental parts. The work for this consists in the development of the   following   faculties:   complete possession of all the five senses in various imaginable   situations;   development   of   a memory of feeling, memory of inspiration or penetration,   memory   of   imagination, and, last, a visual memory. THE CREATURE: But I have never heard of all those. I: Yet they are almost as simple as “cursing the heavens”. The development of faith in imagination;   the   development   of   the imagination   itself;   the   development   of naiveté; the development of observation; the   development   of   will   power;   the development   of   the   capacity   to   give CONCENTRATION 13

variety in the expression of emotion; the development of the sense of humor and the tragic sense. Nor is this all. THE CREATURE: Is it possible? I: One thing alone remains which cannot be developed but must be present. It is  TALENT.   (The   Creature   sighs   and   falls into deep meditation. I also sit in silence).  THE   CREATURE:   You   make   the   theatre seem   like   something   very   big,   very important, very… I: Yes, for me the theatre is a great mystery, a   mystery   in   which   are   wonderfully wedded the two eternal phenomena, the dream of   Perfection   and the dream of the  Eternal.   Only   to   such   a   theatre   is   it worth while to give one’s life.   (I get up, the Creature looks at me with sorrowful eyes.   I   understand   what   these   eyes express.)  14 THE FIRST LESSON

THE SECOND LESSON MEMORY OF EMOTION  Y ou remember the lovely creature who came to me a year   ago, and “simply   loved   the theatre”? She came back this   winter. She entered the room quietly and with grace, smiling, her   face aglow.  THE   CREATURE:   Hello!   (Her   handclasp was   firm   and   strong;   her   eyes   looked straight into mine; her figure was well balanced   and   controlled;   what   a difference!)  I: How do you do? I am certainly glad to see   you.   I   have   followed   your   work although you did not come back to me. I never thought that you would come back. I thought I had frightened you the last time. THE CREATURE: Oh, no, you didn’t! But you cer tainly gave me a lot to work on, an awful lot. What a horrible time I have had   with   that   idea   of   concentration. Everybody laughed at me—Once I was nearly run down by a street car because

I had tried too effectively to concentrate on “the happiness of my existence”. You see, I give myself problems like that for exercise, exactly as you told me to do. In this particular case, I was fired from my job and I wanted to pretend to myself that it didn’t concern me at all. And I succeeded. Oh, I was stronger than ever. I was on my way home and made myself happy in spite of everything. I felt as if I had just received a wonderful part. I was so strong. But I didn’t notice the street car. Fortunately I jumped back in time. I was   scared,   my   heart   was   palpitating, but I still remembered “the happiness of my   existence”.   So   I   smiled   at   the motorman and ordered him to proceed. He said something to me, but I couldn’t understand him—he was talking behind the glass. I: I suspect it was just as well that you didn’t distinguish his words. THE CREATURE: Oh, I see. And do you think he was right—being rude to me? I: I could justify him. You destroyed his concentra tion   as   thoroughly   as   he destroyed   yours.   That   is   where   the drama   began.   The   result   was—action expressed in his words behind the glass and in your command to proceed. THE   CREATURE:   Oh,   you   make   fun   of everything. I: No, I don’t. I think yours is a case of drama in a nutshell. Active drama. 16 THE SECOND LESSON

THE CREATURE: Do you mean to say that it helped my ability to act? My sense of drama? I: Yes, I do. THE CREATURE: How? I: It will take some time to explain. Won’t you sit down and first tell me why you came   to   me   today?   Is   it   another   King Lear?  THE   CREATURE:   Oh,   please!   (Blush— powder   on   the   nose—hat   off—hair adjusted. She sits down; another dab of powder on the nose.)  I:   (As kind as my cigar permits me to be)  You   needn’t   be   ashamed   of   anything, especially of that   King Lear   performance. You were sincere then. That was a year ago; you wanted a little bit too much but you went after it in the right way You just did it. You made the attack yourself. You didn’t wait for somebody to push you. You   know the   story   of   the   fair-haired school boy who had to walk a long way to school. Every day for years he said to himself, “Oh, if I could only fly, I could get to school so much quicker.” Well, you know what happened to him. THE CREATURE: No. I: He flew from New York to Paris, alone— his name was Lindbergh. He is a colonel now. THE CREATURE: Yes.   (A pause)   Can I talk to you seriously?   (She is dreaming now; she   has   learned   to   make   good   use   of everything that comes to her. Inward or  MEMORY OF EMOTION 17

outward, she doesn’t miss the slightest hint of emotion. She is   like a violin whose strings respond to all vibrations, and she remembers   those   vibrations.   I   am   sure she takes all there is   in life as only a strong,   normal   being   can   take   it.   She selects   what   she   wants   to   keep;   she throws away what seems   worthless to her. She will make a good actress.)  I: Yes, but not solemnly. THE CREATURE: I am going to talk to you about   myself.   (She   smiles.)   And…  (Lugubriously)   My Art. I: I hate the way you say, “My art.” Why do you become so serious when you say it? You   smile   at   yourself.   Only   a   few minutes ago you told me that your only reason for living must be “the   happiness  of   your   existence”. Why   do   people   get solemn as soon as they speak of things which have no purpose but to bring joy to others! THE CREATURE: I don’t know about other people,   but   I   am   serious   because   art means everything to me. That is why I came here again, because I simply must make good. I have been given a part and have rehearsed for four days. I feel that I’m   not   very   secure   in   it.   Three   days more and they may take it away from me. They say pleasant things to me, but I know I am not right—and nobody seems to   know   how   to   help   me.   They   say, “speak   louder”,   “feel   something”,   “pick up your cues”, “laugh”, “sob”, and what 18 THE SECOND LESSON

not, but I know that isn’t all. There must be   something   missing.   What   is   it? Where? Where am I to get it? I have done everything you told me to do. I think I control   myself—that   is,   my   body,   very well. I’ve practised for a whole year. The body positions that the part demands are not difficult for me. I feel comfortable in all of them. I use my five senses simply and logically. I am happy when I act and still I don’t know how! I don’t know how! What shall I do? If they fire me, it will be the end of me. And the worst of it all is that I know only too well what they will all say. They will say, “You are very good, but you lack experience”—and that’s all. What   is that   cursed   experience?   There isn’t a thing anybody can tell me about that part—I know everything about it. I look like it, I feel every single minute of it and each change. I know I can act it. And   then—“experience”!   Oh,   I   wish   I could use some of the words that that motorman used who nearly ran over me. I didn’t hear them, but judging from his face, I know they would be right. As a matter of fact, I think I can guess what they were—and oh, how I could use them now! I: Go ahead and use them. Don’t mind me.  (She uses   them.)   Any happier? THE CREATURE: Yes.   (Smile. Laugh.)  I: All right, now you are ready. Now I’ll talk to you. Let’s talk about your part. You will work it out for yourself, and what’s MEMORY OF EMOTION 19

more, you’ll do it right. If you have done all the work you say you have and if the part   is   within   your   range,   you   cannot fail.   Don’t   worry   about   it.   Work   and patience never fail. THE   CREATURE:   Oh,   teacher…   (She starts.)  I: Sit down. I mean it. For a year you have been   perfecting   yourself   as   a   human instrument and gathering material. You have   observed   and   absorbed   life.   You have   collected   what   you   saw,   read, heard, and felt in the stor age places of your brain. You did it both consciously and   unconsciously.   Concentration became your second nature. THE   CREATURE:   I   don’t   think   I   did anything   unconsciously.   I   am   a   very matter-of-fact person. I: I know you are. The actor must be—how otherwise   could   he   dream?   The   only person who can dream is the person who can stand with both feet firmly on the earth. That is why the Irish policeman is the   best   policeman   in   the   world.   He never sleeps on duty. He dreams wide awake.   And   the   gangster   has   little chance. THE CREATURE: Please! I have a part. I want to act it and you talk about Irish policemen. I: No, I am talking about the practicality of dreams. I’m talking about order, about system.   I’m   talking   about   harnessing dreams—conscious   and   unconscious 20 THE SECOND LESSON

dreams—all   useful—all   necessary—all obedient—all   coming   at   your   call.   All parts   in   that   beautiful   state   of   your nature that you call “experience”. THE CREATURE: All right. But what about my part? I:   You   will   have   to   organize   and synchronize the self that is within you, with your part. Then everything will be splendid. THE CREATURE: All right, let’s start. I: First of all, I insist—and you will have to believe me—that you did a great deal of your   work   unconsciously.   Now   we’ll start. What is the most important scene in your part? THE CREATURE: The scene where I tell my mother that I’m going to leave her house, her   poor   and   obscure   house,   for   an extraordinary   reason.   A   rich   lady   has become interested in me and is going to take me into her home to give me all the beautiful   things   of   life—education, travel,   friends,   beautiful   surroundings, clothes, jewels, position—everything. It’s too   marvelous.   I   cannot   withstand temptation.   I   must   go,   but   I   love   my mother and am sorry for her. I struggle between the lure of happiness and love for my mother. My decision is not yet made,   but   the   desire   for   happiness   is very strong. I: Good. Now, how will you do it, and what does your director say? MEMORY OF EMOTION 21

THE CREATURE: He says that I am either happy to go away or love my mother so much that I am not at all happy to go. I cannot blend these two things. I: You must be happy and sorry at the same time. Gleaming and tender. THE   CREATURE:   That’s   it.   I   can’t   feel those two things simultaneously. I: Nobody can, but you can   be   that. THE CREATURE: To   be   that without feeling it? How is that possible? I:   With   the   help   of   your   unconscious memory—of your memory of feelings. THE CREATURE: Unconscious memory of feelings? You mean to say that I must unconsciously memorize my feelings? I: God forbid. We have a special memory for feelings, which works unconsciously by itself and for itself. It’s right there. It is in every artist. It is that which makes experience an essential part of our life and craft. All we have to do is to know how to use it. THE CREATURE: But where is it? How do you get it? Does anybody know about it? I:   Oh,   quite   a   number   of   people.   The French   psychologist,   Théodule   Ribot,   * was the first to speak of it over twenty years ago. He calls it “affective memory” or “memory of affects.” THE CREATURE: How does it work? *   Théodule Ribot:   Problèmes de Psychologic Affective:   Felix Actan. Paris. 22 THE SECOND LESSON

I: Through all the manifestations of life and our sensitivity toward them. THE CREATURE: For example? I: For example, in a certain city there lived a   couple   who   had   been   married   for twenty-five   years.   They   had   married when   they   were   very   young.   He   had proposed to her one fine summer evening when they were walking in a cucumber patch.   Being   nervous,   as   nice   young people   are   apt   to   be   under   the circumstances,   they   would   stop occasionally, pick a cucumber, and eat it, enjoying very much its aroma, taste and the freshness and richness of the sun’s warmth upon it. They made the happiest decision of their lives, between two   mouthfuls   of   cucumbers,   so   to speak. A month later they were married. At the wedding supper a dish of fresh cucumbers was served—and nobody knew why they laughed so heartily when they saw it. Long years of life and struggle came; children and, naturally, difficulties. Sometimes they quarreled, and were angry. Sometimes they did not even speak to each other. But their youngest   daughter   observed   that   the surest way to make peace between them was   to   put a   dish   of   cucumbers   on   the table. Like magic they would forget their quarrels,   and   would   become   tender   and understanding.   For   a   long   time   the daughter thought the change was due to MEMORY OF EMOTION 23

their   love   for   cucumbers,   but   once   the mother told her the story of their courtship, and when she thought about it, she came to another conclusion. I wonder if you can? THE CREATURE:   (Very brightly)   Yes, the outward   circumstances   brought   back the inward feelings. I:   I   wouldn’t   say   feelings.   I   would   say rather, made these two people what they were long years before, in spite of time, reason,   and   maybe—desire,  unconsciously.  THE CREATURE: No, not unconsciously, because they knew what the cucumbers had meant to them. I: After twenty-five years? I doubt it. They were simple souls, they wouldn’t go so far   as   to   analyze   the   origin   of   their feelings.   They   just   naturally   yielded themselves to the feelings as they came. They   were   stronger   than   any   present feeling. It is just as when you start to count, “One, two, three, four,” it takes an effort not to continue, “five, six, etc.” The whole thing is to make a beginning—to start. THE CREATURE: Do you think I have…? I: Undoubtedly. THE CREATURE: I wanted to ask if you thought I had memories like that in me. I:   Plenty   of   them—just   waiting   to   be awakened, just waiting for a call. And what is more, when you do awaken them, 24 THE SECOND LESSON

you can control them, you can make use of   them,   you   can   apply   them   in   your craft. I prefer that word to the word “Art” which you like so much. You can learn the whole secret of experience. THE   CREATURE:   But   not   stage experience. I: Indirectly, yes. Because when you have something to say, the experience comes so much more quickly, a hundred times faster than when you have nothing to say.   It   comes   much   more   surely   than when   all   you   do   is   to   try   to   be experienced, to “speak louder”, to “feel something”,   to   “pick   up   the   cues”,   to “hold the tempo.” Those are problems for children, not for craftsmen. THE CREATURE: But how do you go about those   things?   How   do   you   command them? I: That’s the spirit. You   command   them. In your particular case did you or did you not ever experience that double feeling when you are sad and happy at the same time? THE   CREATURE:   Yes,   yes,   many   times, but I don’t know how to bring it back. I don’t   remember   where I was and what I was doing when I felt that way. I: Never mind where and what. The point is to bring yourself back as you were then, to command your own ego, go where you want to go, and when you are there, to stay   where   you   went.   Give   me   an MEMORY OF EMOTION 25

example of your personal experience with a double feeling. THE CREATURE: Well, I went abroad last summer for the first time in my life. My brother couldn’t go. He saw me off. I was happy and at the same time I was sorry for   him.   But   how   I   acted   I   don’t remember. I: All right. Tell me how the whole thing happened. Start at the moment you left your house. Don’t omit any details. Give me a description of the taxi driver and of all your worries and excitements. Try to recall the weather, the color of the sky, the   smells   at   the   docks,   the   voices   of longshoremen and sailors, the faces of fellow-passengers.   Give   me   a   good journalistic account of the whole thing and   forget   about   yourself.   Work outwardly. Start with your clothing and that of your brother. Go on.  (She starts. Well trained in concentration, she   throws   herself   into   the   subject.   She could give a lesson to any   detective. She is cold,   firm,   exact,   analytical—not   missing details,   not   using   meaningless   words— giving only necessary bare facts. At first she is almost mechanical, almost a   perfect machine. Then when she speaks of a traffic officer   who   stops   the   taxi   and   reads   a sermon   to   the   driver,   and   she   exclaims, “Oh, please, Officer, we will   be late,” the first   sign   of   real   emotion   comes   into   her eyes. She starts to be—she   starts to act. It  26 THE SECOND LESSON

does not come easily. Seven times she goes back to facts and only facts, but gradually they are of less   and less importance. When she   finally   tells   how   she   ran   up   the gangway and jumped on to the deck of the steamer,   her   face   and   eyes   are   shining, involuntarily   she   repeats   the   jump.   Then suddenly she turns her face, and there, not far   away, is her brother down on the pier. Tears come to her   eyes. She conceals them. “Cheer up, cheer up,” she cries. “I’ll   tell you all about it. Give my love to everybody. Oh, how   I   hate to leave New York. I’d rather stay with you, but it’s too   late now. Besides you wouldn’t want me to. Oh, it’s going   to be too wonderful…”)  I: Stop. Now go on with the speech from your part in the play. Don’t lose what you’ve got. Just exactly as you are now— speaking to your brother. You are what you ought to be in the part. THE CREATURE: But I am speaking to my mother in the part. I: Is she really your mother? THE CREATURE: No. I: Then what difference does it make? The theatre exists to show things which do not exist actually. When you love on the stage, do you really love? Be logical. You substitute creation for the real thing. The creation must be real, but that is the only reality that should be there. Your experience   of   double   feeling   was   a MEMORY OF EMOTION 27

fortunate   accident.   Through   your   will power and the knowledge of your craft you have organized it and re-created it. It is now in your hands. Use it if your artistic sense tells you that it is relative to your problem and creates a wouldbe life.   To   imitate   is   wrong.   To   create   is right. THE   CREATURE:   But   while   you   were speaking, I lost what seemed to be that very important process of re-creation. Do I have to begin my story again? Must I go back   again   to   that   state   of   double feeling? I: How do you learn a tune you want to remember? How do you learn the outline of muscles you want to draw? How do you learn the mixture of colors you want to   use   in   painting?   Through   constant repetition and perfection. It may be hard for you, easier for someone else. One person remembers a tune, hearing it just   once—another   will   have   to   hear   it many   times.   Toscanini   remembers   it, reading a manuscript once. Practice! I have given you an example. You can find around and within you hundreds of opportunities. Work on them and learn to bring back what seems lost. Learn to bring it back actually and make good use of it. At first it will require much time, skill, and effort. The subject is delicate. You will find the trend and lose it again many times. Don’t get discouraged. Remember, this is an actor’s 28 THE SECOND LESSON

fundamental work—to be able “to be” what he desires consciously and exactly. THE   CREATURE:   In   my   particular   case, how would you suggest that I bring back what I seem to have found and lost? I: First of all, work on it alone. It was all right for me to demonstrate as I did to show you the way, but your actual work is   done   in   solitude—entirely   inside   of yourself. You know how, now, through concentration. Think over the process of approach toward the actual moment of that   real   double   feeling.   You   will know when you get it. You will feel the warmth of it and the satisfaction. Practically   every   good   actor   does   it unconsciously   when   he   acts   well   and   is happy about it. However, gradually, it will take you less and less time. It will be just like recalling a tune. Finally the flash of thought   will   be   sufficient.   You   will eliminate details. You will define the whole thing inside of your being with certain aim, and with practice, a mere hint will make you   “be”   what   you   want.   Then   use   the author’s   words   and   if   your   choice   was right, they will always sound fresh, always alive! You won’t need to play them. You’ll hardly need to form them, they will come so naturally All you will need is to have perfect bodily technique in order to project MEMORY OF EMOTION 29

whatever   emotion   you   are   prompted   to express. THE CREATURE: And if the choice of my own feelings is not right, what then? I: Have you seen a manuscript of Wagner’s music? If you are in Bayreuth, go to see one. See how many times Wagner erased and crossed out notes and melodies and harmonies   until   he   found   the   one   he wanted. If he did it so many times, surely you can try no less often. THE CREATURE: Suppose I don’t find a similar   feeling   in   my   life’s   experience, what then? I: Impossible! If you are a sensitive and normal human being, all life is open and familiar   to   you.   After   all,   poets   and playwrights are human too. If they find experience   in   their   lives   to   use,   why shouldn’t you? But you will have to use your   imagination;   you   can   never   tell where   you   will   find   the   thing   you   are after. THE CREATURE: All right, suppose I have to play murder. I have never murdered anybody. How shall I find it? I: Oh, why do actors always ask me about murder? The younger they are the more murders they want to act. All right, you have never murdered anybody. Have you ever camped? THE CREATURE: Yes. 30 THE SECOND LESSON

I: Ever sat in the woods at the edge of a lake after sundown? THE CREATURE: Yes. I: Were there any mosquitoes around? THE CREATURE: It was in New Jersey. I: Did they annoy you? Did you follow one among them with your eyes and ears and hate   until   the   beast landed   on   your forearm? And did you slap your forearm cruelly without even thinking of the hurt to yourself— with only the wish to…end? THE CREATURE:   (Quite ashamed)   To kill the beast. I: There you are. A good sensitive artist doesn’t need any more than that to play Othello   and   Desdemona’s   final   scene. The   rest   is   the   work   of   magnification, imagination, and belief. Gordon Craig has a charming book-plate, fantastic,   with   an   unusual,   beautiful pattern—unknown   and   strange.   You cannot tell what it is, but it gives you a sense   of   brooding,   a   sense   of   boring through, a sense of slow drive and struggle. It is nothing but a book-worm, a common book-worm,   enlarged   many   times.   An artist will find his source anywhere. Nature has not given one-hundredth part of what it still holds for you. Go and look for it. One of the most charming grotesque actors on   the   stage   is   Ed   Wynn.   Can   you   see where   he   began   his   trick   of   putting   a windshield   with   a   wiper   before   his   eyes when he started to eat a grapefruit? Can’t MEMORY OF EMOTION 31

you see how he watched the mud and the water   as   he   drove   along   in   his   car, protected by the real windshield, watched it   with   perfect   satisfaction,   feeling safe? Then, once at luncheon, perhaps, he got   an   eyeful   of   grapefruit   juice.   He associated the two ideas, and the result—a charming foolery. THE CREATURE: I doubt that he thought it out that way. I:   Certainly   not.   But   unconsciously   he went through the whole process. How do you   expect   to   learn   your   craft   if   you don’t   analyze   what   has   been   already achieved? Then forget about it all and go after your own achievements. THE CREATURE: What do you do when you find places in the part where you cannot apply that “to be” of yours? I: You must find it for every place, but be careful not to overdo it. Don’t look for “to be” when you should seek “to do.” Don’t forget that when you want to be an actor with all your heart and soul, want it to such an extent that you forget your self entirely,   and   when   your   technique   is developed   sufficiently,   you   can   already act most of the stuff that is written. It is just like humming a tune. The difficult spots are what you should watch for and work for. Every play is written for one or at most a few “high tension” moments. The audience pays the price of the tickets 32 THE SECOND LESSON

—not for two whole hours—but for the best ten seconds, the ten seconds when it gets the biggest laugh or thrill. Your whole strength and perfection must be directed toward those seconds. THE CREATURE: Thanks, I have them in my part. I know now what was wrong— there are three places which I haven’t lifted above the rest of the play—that is why   I   was   monotonous.   I   will   look forward now “to be” in those places. Are you sure they will come out all right? I: Sure as I am that you will soon come back to me with another problem. THE CREATURE: Oh, I was so foolish not to come back to you right away. I: Not at all. It takes at least a year to get the   foundation   for   your   technique. You’ve got enough to be an actress now. So nothing is lost. If I had told you a year ago what I am telling you now, you wouldn’t   have   understood   it,   and   you would never have come back. Now you have come and something tells me your next visit will be quite soon. I think I even know when— when you get a part which won’t be yourself—where you will have   to   change   yourself   a   little   bit— where   you will   no   longer   be   a   mere convenient   type,   but   must   become   a daring artist. THE CREATURE: May I come tomorrow? I: No, not until you act your part. I hope you will act it very well. And I hope you won’t get very good notices. Nothing is so MEMORY OF EMOTION 33

bad   for   a   young   artist   as   glorifying notices. When that happens, before you realize it, you become lazy and are late for rehearsals. THE CREATURE: That reminds me. I:   I   know.   That’s   why   I   said   it.   Go   and rehearse now. As happy and as strong as ever.   You   have   something   beautiful   to work on. Meantime, remember that little story about cucumbers. Notice   everything   around   you—watch yourself   cheerfully.   Collect   and   save   in your   soul   all   the   riches   of   life   and   the fulness   of   it.   Keep   those   memories   in order.   You   can   never   tell   when   you   will need them, but they are your only friends and teachers in your craft. They are your only   paints   and   brushes.   And   they   will bring   you   reward.   They   are   yours—your own property. They are not imitations, and they   will   give   you   experience,   precision, economy, and power. THE CREATURE: Yes. Thanks. I: And the next time you come to me, bring me at least a hundred records of your registered   moments   when   you   made yourself “to be” what you wanted when you wanted. THE CREATURE: Oh, don’t you worry. The next time I come to you I will know my… cucumbers. 34 THE SECOND LESSON

(She   goes   away,   strong,   alive,   and beautiful; I am left   alone with my cigar.)  I   wonder   who   said,   “The   object   of Education is not to know but to live.” MEMORY OF EMOTION 35

THE THIRD LESSON DRAMATIC ACTION  T he Creature and I are walking in the park. She is in a   rage. She has been rehearsing a part in the talkies.  THE CREATURE: …and then they stopped. I   waited   for   an   hour   and   a   half.   We started. This time three lines from the big scene; three lines—that was all. After that   again   a   wait   of   an   hour.   It   is impossible—   simply   impossible. Machinery,   electricity,   lenses,   micro- phone, furniture, that is all that counts. An   actor?   Who   cares?   Acting?   A miserable accessory. I: And yet a few actors achieve quite a high degree of dramatic art. THE CREATURE: Now and then—for five seconds—rare as black pearls. I: If you look for them, not so rare. THE CREATURE: Oh, how can you say so? You,   who   all   your   life   advocated   the magnificent,   flowing,   live   theatre.   How can you look for rare moments of beauty

in   talkies?   Even   when   you   find   them they   are   separated,   disjointed,   cut, uneven.   How   can   you   defend   those moments and justify them? I: Tell me, have I helped you before with my talks? THE CREATURE: You have. I: Are you willing to listen now, with as little interruption as possible? THE CREATURE: I am. I: All right. Look at that marble fountain. It was made in 1902 by Arthur Collins. THE CREATURE: How do you know! I: It is chiselled on the rim of the base. You promised not to interrupt me. THE CREATURE: Sorry. I: How do you like Mr. Collins’ work? THE   CREATURE:   Not   bad.   Quite   simple and clear in form. It harmonizes with the landscape; it is noble. Made in 1902, it has   definite   traces   of   modern conception. What else has Arthur Collins done? I: This is the last work he ever did. He died —thirty-five   years   of   age.   He   was   a promising   sculptor.   Though   young,   he influenced many of the modern masters. THE   CREATURE:   I   can   see   it.   Isn’t   it wonderful that he left his work behind him so that we can look at it, trace the line of creative descent, and understand the vision of our contemporaries. I: It is wonderful, indeed. Wouldn’t you like to see and hear Mrs. Siddons right now, acting the lines: DRAMATIC ACTION 37

“Here’s the smell of the blood still; all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh! Oh! Oh!” What would you give to learn what Mrs. Siddons did with those “Oh! Oh! Oh!’s”? They say that people used to faint when she did it; we don’t know. And wouldn’t you like to hear David Garrick, in   Richard III,   scorn William Catesby: “Slave! I have set my life upon a cast. And I will stand the hazard of the die.” Or Jefferson, or Booth, or Ellen Terry? I still remember Salvini’s reaction when Iago would say: “But he that filches from me my good name   Robs   me   of   that   which   not enriches   him,   And   makes   me   poor indeed.” I tried once to describe it. In vain. It is gone. This fountain speaks for itself. There is nothing to speak for Salvini. THE CREATURE: Really, it is a pity…   (She pauses,   grows pensive, and then says, with a wistful smile—)   Well, it seems that I gave you a cue. I:   You   always   give   me   the   cues.   I   don’t invent   things.   I   observe   them   and present   them   to   you;   you   draw   the conclusions and profit by them. The only 38 THE THIRD LESSON

real rules in art are the rules that we discover for ourselves. THE CREATURE: I have discovered that it is too bad not to have the images and voices   of   great   actors   preserved   for posterity.   Now,   I’m   drawing   a conclusion; because of that I must suffer in   my   work   the   mechanism   and cheapness of the talkies? I: No. The only thing you have to do is to march   abreast   of   your   times,   and   do your best—as an artist. THE CREATURE: Impossible. I: Inevitable. THE   CREATURE:   It   is   a   false   vogue—a fad. I: Narrow way of thinking. THE CREATURE: My whole nature as an actress   rebels   against   that   mechanical monster. I: Then you are not an actress. THE CREATURE: Because I want a free, uninterrupted outlet for my inspiration and creative work? I: No. Because you do not rejoice in the discovery of a great and final instrument of drama; the instrument which all the other   arts   have   had   since   time immemorial, and which the oldest art, the   theatre,   lacked   until   today;   the instrument that gives to the theatre the precision   and   scientific   serenity   which all   the   other   arts   have   had;   the instrument that demands of the actor to be   as   exact   as   the   color   scheme   in DRAMATIC ACTION 39

painting, form in sculpture, string, wood, brass   in   music,   mathematics   in architecture, words in poetry. THE CREATURE: But look at the hundreds of   incredibly   stupid   talkies   appearing each   week—poor   acting,   insignificant action, wrong rhythm. I:   Look   at   the   hundreds   of   millions   of stupid   paintings,   songs,   performances, houses, and books that have appeared since the beginning of time, that have gone   into   oblivion   without   hurting anybody while the good ones survived. THE CREATURE: Is one good talkie worth hundreds of bad ones? I: Be generous. The idea is worth them. It is the preservation of the art of the actor —the art of the theatre. Spoken drama equally   with   written   drama.   Do   you realize   that   with   the   invention   of spontaneous   recording   of   the   image, movement, and voice, and consequently the personality and soul of an actor, the last missing link in the chain of the arts disappears, and the theatre is no more a passing affair, but an eternal record? Do you   realize   that   the   intimate   creative work   of   an   actor   need   no   longer   be performed   before   the   public   eye;   that there   need   be   no   more   dragging   the audience   into   a   sweat   and   labor   over your   work?   The   actor   is   free   from onlookers in the moment of creation and only the results of it are judged. 40 THE THIRD LESSON

THE   CREATURE:   The   actor   in   front   of machinery is not free. He is chopped to pieces—almost every sentence of his part is separated from the previous and the following ones. I: Every word of a poet is separated from the other words. The assembled whole is what counts. THE CREATURE: But how can one get the flow of the part? How can one build up an emotion and rise to the unconscious climaxes of real inspired interpretation of a part? I:   In   the   way   one   should   do   it   in   the theatre. Because you have had one or two successful parts on the stage you think   there   is   nothing   more   to   learn, nothing more to improve or to build up in your technique. THE CREATURE: You know that isn’t so. I always   want   to   learn.   Otherwise   I wouldn’t   be   walking   with   you   for   the second time around this silly lake. I: Well, our walk is smooth, continuous, easy   flowing,   building   up   toward   a climax. THE   CREATURE:   Which   will   be   when   I drop breathless on the grass? I:   Exactly,   and   that’s   the   way   you   play your   parts—   rushing   through   them, building   up   emotion,   and   chasing   the climax   until   you   drop   in   a   critic’s   lap trying to catch a breath. And you don’t get much breath from them either. DRAMATIC ACTION 41

THE   CREATURE:   Well,   I   can   see   that something is coming. What is it? I: What was your main difficulty acting in the talkies? THE   CREATURE:   Lack   of   springboard. Being com pelled to start a scene in the middle   and   finish   it   after   four   or   five lines, then in another hour start another scene (which in the script comes before the previous one), then again act four lines   and   wait   an   hour.   I   tell   you   it’s abnormal, it’s horrible— I: Lack of technique, that’s all. THE CREATURE: What technique? I: Of action’s structure. THE CREATURE: Stage action? I:   Dramatic   action   which   the   writer expresses in words, having that action as the purpose and goal of his words, and which the actor performs, or acts, as the word actor itself implies. THE CREATURE: That is exactly what it is impossible to do in the talkies. I had a love scene, two and a half pages in the script, and when I was acting it I was interrupted   eleven   times.   It   took   the whole day. My action was to convince the man who loved me that I loved him too, but was terrified by his father’s hatred of me. I: This on two and a half pages?—you said it in one line, quite convincingly. What did you do for the remainder of the two and a half pages? 42 THE THIRD LESSON

THE CREATURE: I tried to do the same thing. I: For two and a half pages? Thank God they did interrupt you eleven times. THE   CREATURE:   That   was   the   action. What else was there to do? I: Look at that tree. It is the protagonist of all arts; it is an ideal structure of action. Upward   movement   and   sideway resistance, balance and growth. THE CREATURE: Granted. I:   Look   at   the   trunk—straight, proportioned, harmonious with the rest of the tree, supporting every part of it. It is the leading strain; “Leitmotif” in music; a director’s idea of action in a play; the architect’s   foundation;   the   poet’s thought in a sonnet. THE   CREATURE:   How   does   a   director express that action in producing a play? I: Through interpretation of the play, and through   ingenious   combinations   of smaller,   secondary,   or   complementary actions   that   will   secure   that interpretation. THE CREATURE: Give an example. I: All right.   The Taming of the Shrew   is a play where two people long to love each other   in   spite   of   their   impossible characters, and succeed in their longing. It might also be a play about a man who triumphs over a woman by “treating her rough”.   It   might   be   a   play   about   a woman   who   makes   everybody’s   life miserable. Do you grasp the difference? DRAMATIC ACTION 43

THE CREATURE: I do. I: In the first case the action is to love; in the second swash-buckling; in the third the anger of a vixen. THE CREATURE: Do you mean to say that in the first case, for instance, when the action is love, you would make the actors assume the attitude of love all the way through? I: I would make them remember it. I would ask them to have it behind every curse, every quarrel, every disagreement. THE CREATURE: What would you expect from an actor? I: To comply with nature’s law of action, the three-fold law you can see expressed in that tree. First, the main trunk, the idea, the reason. On the stage it comes from the director. Second, the branches, elements of the idea, particles of reason. That comes from the actor. Third, the foliage, the result of the previous two, the   brilliant   presentation   of   idea,   the bright conclusion of reasoning. THE CREATURE: Where does the author appear on the scene? I: He is the sap that flows and feeds the whole. THE   CREATURE:   (With   a   twinkle   in   her eyes)   That was a narrow escape for the actor. I:   (With a twinkle in my eyes also)   Well, if he   doesn’t   know   how   to   project   his actions in front of… 44 THE THIRD LESSON

THE CREATURE: That’s enough. I take it on the chin. I: …the camera and microphone, and is afraid of eleven interruptions…. THE CREATURE:   (She stops and stamps her foot.)   All right. All right.   (She is very much annoyed.)   Tell me how   not   to be afraid of them. I: I need a written part or a play to show you exactly what I mean by the structure of action. I haven’t one with me. THE   CREATURE:   We   have   acted   a   nice little play right through, during our walk in the last half hour. Whenever we talk, we always do, as a matter of fact. Why don’t you use what we have talked over as a play? I: All right. I’m the director. You are a young actress performing a one-act play with a grumpy old man. I am that man, also. THE   CREATURE:   Let’s   talk   about characterizations later, another time. I:   At   your   service.   Now   the   director   is speaking: The trunk, or the “spine” of your little play, my friends (meaning you and me), is the discovery of truth about dramatic action, not on a dark stage, or in a classroom, or from learned books, or in front of an angry director ready to fire you, but in the midst of nature, enjoying air, sun, a brisk walk and good humor. THE   CREATURE:   Which   means   quick thinking,   energetic   penetration,   bright spirit, conviction in ideas, eagerness to DRAMATIC ACTION 45

understand, clear voices, fast tempo, and readiness to argue, to give, and to take. I: Bravo! Bravo! As the director I’m through. With your help we have established the trunk or “spine”. Now, let’s turn to the sap. THE CREATURE: Meaning the author…? I: Exactly Is that nice? THE   CREATURE:   (Runs   away   from   me, claps   her   hands,   and   laughs   with   the most childish satisfaction. I run   after her, and catch her by the hand.)  I: We are even. Let’s continue, and analyze the words in terms of action. Let’s take your   part.   What   did   you   do   at   the beginning of the play? THE CREATURE: I complained… I: …Bitterly and exaggeratedly… THE   CREATURE:   …I   scorned   and despised… I: …With the charming resolution of youth. THE CREATURE: …I piled up the evidence. I: Not convincingly, but forcefully. THE CREATURE: I didn’t believe you…and reproached you. I: Like a stubborn youngster. And you have forgotten   that   at   the   same   time   you walked, sometimes you agreed with me, you   observed   and   studied   Mr.   Collins’ fountain,   you   felt   physically   tired,   you looked   for   words   to   oppose   my arguments,   you   enjoyed   a   few Shakespearean lines, and with all that you covered about nine speeches. 46 THE THIRD LESSON

THE CREATURE:   (Horrified)   Have I done all those things at once? I:   Never.   No   human   being   could.   But having   the   main   trunk,   or   thread   of action   in   mind,   what   you   did   was   to string on that thread the secondary, or complementary actions like beads on a string,   one   after   another,   sometimes overlapping each other but always clear and distinct. THE   CREATURE:   Weren’t   they   just intonations and inflections? I: Where would they come from, if not as the result of action? THE CREATURE: That’s true. I: Describing your actions, you used only verbs—that   is   significant.   A   verb   is action   in   itself.   First   you   want something, it is your artist’s will; then you define it in a verb, it is your artist’s technique; and then you actually do it, it is   your   artist’s   expression.   You   do   it through the medium of speech—words of a… THE   CREATURE:   My   own   words   in   this case. I: It doesn’t matter, although some clever author’s words would have been much better. THE   CREATURE:   (Nods   silently—it   is   so hard to agree   while one is young.)  I: The author would have written them for you. Then you could take a pencil and write “music of action’ under every word or speech, as you write music to lyrics DRAMATIC ACTION 47

for a song; then on the stage you would play that “music of action”. You would have to memorize your actions as you memorize the music. You would have to know distinctly the difference between “I complained”   and   “I   scorned”   and, although   the   two   actions   follow   each other, you would be just as differ ent in their delivery as the singer is when he takes “C” or “C flat”. Moreover, when you know action by heart no   interruption   or   change   of   order   can disturb   you.   If   you   have   your   action confined within one single word, and you know exactly what that action is, you have it   inside   of   you   on   the   call   of   a   split second, how can you be disturbed when the   time   comes   for   its   delivery?   Your scene, or part, is a long string of beads— beads of action. You play with them as you play with a rosary. You can start anywhere, any time, and go as far as you wish, if you have a good hold on the beads themselves. THE   CREATURE:   But   doesn’t   it   happen that the same action may last for pages, or at least a very long scene? I: Certainly, only it is more difficult for the actor to keep it going without monotony —“To be or not to be” has nine sentences with one single action… THE CREATURE: What is it? 48 THE THIRD LESSON

I: To be or not to be. Shakespeare did not take any chances with actors. He told them   right   in   the   beginning   what   he wanted them to do. On account of the significance of that action and the length of the scene itself it is the hardest thing to act. To recite it is very easy. THE   CREATURE:   I   understand.   The recitation   is   like   the   foliage   of   a   tree without the trunk and branches. I:   Precisely—just   juggling   with   the modulation of voice and artificial pauses. Even in the best case with a very well trained voice it is only poor music. As drama, it is nil. THE   CREATURE:   What   was   your   action when   you   started   to   enumerate   the names of actors and speeches in their parts? You really looked sorrowful and wistful.   Have   you   forgotten   the   agreed “spine”? We decided it must be “energy, bright spirit, quick thinking” and so on… I: No. But what I wanted was to make you say, “It is a pity.” I could do it in one way only, namely by arousing your sympathy toward my feelings. That in turn made you   think   about   my   words,   and   you yourself drew the conclusion that I was looking for. THE CREATURE: In other words, you acted sorrowful to make me pensive? I: Yes, and I acted it “energetically, with bright spirit and quick thinking.” DRAMATIC ACTION 49

THE CREATURE: Could you perform some other action with the same words, and get the same results? I: Yes. But my action was prompted by you. THE CREATURE: By me? I:   Yes.   By   your   character   rather.   To convince   you   in   anything   one   must approach   you   through   emotion.   Cold reasoning is inaccessible to your type of mind— the mind of an artist who deals mostly   with   his   or   other   people’s imaginations.   If,   instead   of   you,   I   had had a bearded Professor of History as a companion,   I   wouldn’t   have   acted sorrowful at all. I would have tempted him enthusiastically with a picture of the past—a weak spot of all historians—and he would have yielded to my statement. THE   CREATURE:   I   see.   So   one   must choose   his   actions   in   accordance   with the character of the part that opposes him. I:   Always.   Not   only   the   character   of   the part,   but   also   the   individuality   of   the actor who plays the part. THE CREATURE: How do I memorize the action? I: After you have found the feeling through your “memory of affects”. You remember our last talk? THE CREATURE: I do. I:   You   are   ready   for   action.   Rehearsals serve the purpose. You repeat the action a   few   times   and   you remember   it. Actions   are   very   easy   to   remember— 50 THE THIRD LESSON

much easier than words. Tell me right now, what did you act in the first nine speeches of our play—the one we went through? THE   CREATURE:   (Bursts   into   rapid energetic enumeration. All her heart is in it.)   I   complained,   scorned,   despised.   I reproached you. I didn’t believe you… I: And what is your action now, while you are   enthusiastically   throwing   all   those hateful verbs into my face? THE CREATURE: I… I… I: Come on—what is your action? THE CREATURE: I am proving to you that I believe your words. I:   And   I   believe   you,   because   you   have proved it with action. DRAMATIC ACTION 51

THE FOURTH LESSON CHARACTERIZATION  I   am waiting for the Creature at the stage entrance.   She   is   with   a   company   in   an important play. She has asked me   to come after   rehearsal   and   take   her   home.   She wants to talk   to me about her part. I do not have long to wait. The door opens. She comes   out hurriedly. Tired, her eyes gleaming,   her   lovely   hair   dishevelled,   a tender flush of excitement on her cheeks.  THE CREATURE: I’m sorry to disappoint you. I cannot go with you. I’m not going home. I have to stay here and rehearse. I:   I   saw   all   the   actors   leaving—Are   you going to rehearse alone? THE   CREATURE:   (Nodding   sadly)   Uh- mmmm— I: Any trouble? THE CREATURE: Plenty. I: May I come in and watch you rehearse? THE CREATURE: Thank you. I was afraid to ask you. I: Why?

THE CREATURE:   (Lifts herself on her toes and whispers into my ear, her eyes round with horror—)   I’m very, Oh, very bad. I: I would rather hear you say that than “Come and see me—I’m very, Oh, very good.” THE CREATURE: Well, I’m saying that I’m bad because it’s all your fault. In this new part I have done everything you told me, and still I’m bad. I: All right, let’s see.  (We pass a very old doorman in his shirt sleeves, smoking a pipe. He looks at me with deep-set, dark eyes   from   under bushy eyebrows.   His   clean-shaven   face   is   set firmly.   He is not letting anybody in. His very presence   bars   the   entrance.   He   acts   the part. He is not just a watchman—he   is a splendid   impersonation   of   Francisco, Bernardo,   or   Marcellus   at   his   post.   He raises his hand in a noble gesture.)  THE CREATURE: That’s all right, Pa, the gentleman is with me.  (The old man nods silently, and in his old eyes I can   read permission to enter. I think to   myself   “It   takes   an   actor   to   be   so economically   gracious.   I   wonder   if   he   is one?” I take   my hat off as I enter the stage. It is dark. One electric bulb   etches a halo in the centre of the darkness. The Creature takes   me by the hand and leads me down  CHARACTERIZATION 53

the stairway and among   the stalls into the pit.)  THE   CREATURE:   Sit   here,   please;   don’t say anything; don’t interrupt me. Let me act a few scenes in succession for you, then tell me what is wrong.  (She goes back to the stage. I am left alone, in a space   bordered by glittering dark holes of boxes, by silent rows of   chairs covered with canvas, by faint outside noises. All the shadows are strange and solid. The quiet is trembling and   alive. I respond to that quiet. My nerves begin to vibrate   and to throw threads   of   sympathy   and   expectation toward   the great promising black riddle, the empty stage. A peculiar   peace descends on my mind, as if I partially cease to exist and somebody else’s soul is living in me instead of my own. I will   be dead to myself, alive to the   outward   world.   I   will   observe   and participate   in   an   imaginary   world.   I   will wake   up   with   my   heart   full   of   dreams. Sweet poison of an empty   theatre, empty stage and a single actor rehearsing on it.  The Creature appears. She has a book in her hand. She   tries to ready   but her mind is distracted.   Obviously   she   is   waiting   for somebody.   It   must   be   somebody   of importance   indeed. She seems to tremble. She looks around as if asking   approval and advice   from   an   invisible   friend.   She   is encouraged; I can hear her faint sigh.  54 THE FOURTH LESSON

Then suddenly she sees somebody in the far distance. She   stiffens, draws her breath quickly. She must be afraid. She   makes as if to read from the book. But it is clear to me that   she does not see a single letter. Not a word is spoken. I am   watching tensely and whisper to myself “Well done, well   done, Creature, I’m ready now for every word you utter.” The Creature listens. Her body is relaxed, the hand   holding the book hangs limply. Her head is turned slightly to   one side, an unconscious help to the ear through which imaginary words enter her soul. She nods her head.)  THE CREATURE: “Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day?”  (There is a warm, sincere affection and respect in her   voice. She speaks as if to an elder brother. Then she looks,   with fear and trembling,   for   an   imaginary   answer.   The answer comes.)  • • • • • •  (She closes her eyes for a moment)  “My   lord,   I   have   remembrances   of yours, That I have longed long to re- deliver; I pray you, now receive them.” CHARACTERIZATION 55

(What is it? She sounds as if she were not telling quite   the truth. Expectant fear in her voice. She stands as if petrified. She looks around again as if for the support of an invisible friend. Suddenly she shrinks back as if hit by the   imaginary answer.)  • • • • • •  (It must have been a blow, right at the heart. Her book   falls, her trembling fingers clutch one another. She defends   herself.)  “My honour’d lord, you know right well you did; And, with them, words of so sweet   breath   compos’d   As   made   the things more rich: their perfume lost, Take these again; for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.”  (Her   voice   breaks,   then   suddenly   soars freely   and   strongly   in   defense   of   injured pride and love.)  “There, my lord.”  (She seems to grow taller. It is the result of co-ordination   between her muscles and her emotion, the first sign of a   trained actress: the stronger the emotion, the more freedom in   the   voice,   the   more   relaxation   in muscles.)  • • • • • • “My lord?”  (There is an almost masculine strength in that fragile   body.)  • • • • • • 56 THE FOURTH LESSON

“What means your lordship?”  (Her fear forgotten, she speaks now as an equal. She   does not look around for help or confirmation of her actions.   She throws the words into the black space without seeming to wait for an answer.)  • • • • • • “Could   beauty,   my   lord,   have   better commerce than with honesty?” • • • • • •  (Then a change comes over her face. Pain, tenderness,   sorrow, adoration, all are in   her eyes   and   on   her   trembling   lips.   I understand; the enemy is the beloved one. A whispered   line—like moaning wind—)  “Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.” • • • • • •  (And still more quietly and sorrowfully)  “I was the more deceived.” • • • • • •  (Then comes a long silence. She absorbs inaudible   words   of   anger,   shame, accusation, words which throw her to earth and remind her of somebody whom she has forgotten   in   her   sincerity   but   who   has power   over   her   and   who   has   told   her exactly what to do. She is conscious of him now. She is not   herself, she is an obedient daughter.   She   is   a   tool   in   her   father’s hands. Suddenly she shudders. She hears the   inevitable   question,   the   compromising question. And again   a lie is the answer, a torturing lie.)  “At home, my lord.” CHARACTERIZATION 57

• • • • • •  (Horror lashes her; despair makes her sob from the   depths of her soul, as if all her being wailed, Oh, what have   I done? Then a prayer to the Only One who can help now.)  “O, help him, you sweet heavens!” • • • • • • “O heavenly powers, restore him!” • • • • • •  (But heaven and earth are silent. The only thunder   is   the   voice   of   one   whom   she trusted and loved. The words   behind that voice are like stinging scorpions. Not a sign of   understanding   in   them,   not   a   sign   of tenderness—not   a   tone   of   mercy.   Hate, accusation, denouncement. The end of the world. Because the world for all of us is the one whom we   love. When he is gone the world is gone. When the world is   gone we are gone. And therefore we can be calm and empty   and   oblivious   to   everything   and everyone   who   a   minute   ago   was   so important   and   powerful.   The   Creature   is alone in   her whole being. I can see it in her contracted   body   and   wide   open   eyes.   If there were an army of fathers behind her now,   she   would   be   alone.   And   only   to herself would she say those   heartbreaking words, the last words of a sound mind, that tries desperately to verify all that happened a second ago. It   is unbelievably painful. It is like   the   soul   parting   from   the   body.   The separated words crowd each other, hurry one over   the other in a fast-growing rhythm. The voice is hollow. The   tears behind it are  58 THE FOURTH LESSON

inadequate to accompany that last   farewell; the   speech   is   like   a   stone   falling   down, down,   into   a bottomless abyss.)  “O,   what   a   noble   mind   is   here o’erthrown! The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s eye, tongue, sword: The   expectancy   and   rose   of   the   fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observ’d of all observers,—quite, quite down! And   I,   of   ladies   most   deject   and wretched, That   suck’d   the   honey   of   his   music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That   unmatch’d   form   and   feature   of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To   have   seen   what   I   have   seen,   see what I see!”  (She sinks down on her knees, exhausted, staring   into   the   blackness   of   the   empty house right at me, without seeing,   without registering anything. Madness next would be the   inevitable and logical madness of the mind which has lost its   world.)  CHARACTERIZATION 59

• • • • • •  (She snaps out of it all, jumps up from the ground, rubs   her head and shakes out her golden   hair   with   her   hands,   swerves around, and says in her youthful voice)  THE CREATURE: Well, that’s my best, and as Gordon Craig says “It’s just too bad that someone’s best is so bad.”  (She   giggles.   Another   sign   of   a   trained actor. It doesn’t   matter how deep emotion is in acting, with the return to life   it snaps off and is laid aside with no perturbance.)  I: Come down here.  (She vaults over the footlights, runs to the chair next to   mine, and sits down, tucking her legs under her.)  I: What do they say to you? THE   CREATURE:   …That   it   is   overdone. That I “tear a passion to tatters”. That nobody   would   believe   me.   That   it   is pathological hypnotism, not acting, and that I will ruin myself and my health. That with this kind of acting nothing is left for the audience’s imagination, that for the audience such complete sincerity is   embarrassing.   As   if   somebody suddenly appeared naked in the midst of a dressed-up crowd. Is that enough, or is it? I: Not only enough, but true, my dear. 60 THE FOURTH LESSON

THE   CREATURE:   Et   tu,   Brute?   You   are impossible.   I   have   done   everything   as you taught me… I: And done it well, I must say THE CREATURE: Then I don’t understand; you contradict— I:   Not   at   all.   You   have   done   faithfully everything that I taught you. So far I’m proud of you. So far. Now you must take the next step. It’s not an exaggeration when they tell you that you resemble a naked   person   in   a   dressed-up   crowd. You do. I don’t mind it, because I know what it is all about—but the audience will.   They   are   entitled   to   a   finished product. THE   CREATURE:   Does   that   mean   more schooling and more exercises? I: It does. THE CREATURE: I give up. But go ahead. I: You don’t give up. If I did not tell you right now what I’m going to tell you, you would work until you found it out for yourself. It might take you a few years, maybe more. But you would work until you   had   mastered   the   next   step.   And even   then   you   would   not   stop.   A   new difficulty would arise, and you would go after that. THE CREATURE: Endlessly? I: Endlessly and persistently. That is the only difference between an artist and a shoemaker.   When   the   shoemaker   has done   his   pair   of   boots,   it   is   over,   he forgets   about   them.   When   an   artist CHARACTERIZATION 61

finishes a piece of work, it is not done. It is   just   another   step.   All   the   steps dovetail one into the other. THE   CREATURE:   If   you   were   not   so exasperatingly   logical;   just   like   an   old mathematician,   one,   two,   three,   four. Disgusting. No art, just a handicraft. An old cabinet maker, that’s what you are. I: You mean emotion maker? Thank you for the compliment. Would you like me now to turn into a dressmaker and dress your   emotions?   Because,   as   we   both agree, myself and your superiors, your emotions   are   quite   naked,   my   child. Quite distressingly so. THE   CREATURE:   (Laughs   heartily   and provocatively.)   I don’t mind. I: But I do. I don’t want anybody to say that my pseudo-moralities are immoral. Amoral, maybe, but not immoral. THE CREATURE:   (Still laughing)   I wouldn’t think of such a thing. Please dress me. I’m   naked—ears,   nose,   eyes,   emotions and all. I: I’ll take care only of the emotions, if you please. And I’ll start by covering them with praise. I noted carefully everything you   did   in   building   your   part—your physical   control,   your   concentration, your   choice   and   clear   outline   of emotions, your power of projecting those emotions.   All   that   was   splendid.   I’m proud of you. But it lacked one thing. THE CREATURE: What? I: Characterization. 62 THE FOURTH LESSON

THE CREATURE: Oh, that’s simple. When I put my costume on, and my make-up. I: Nothing will happen, my dear. THE CREATURE: You can’t say that. When I am all made up and dressed, I feel like the person I am supposed to represent. I’m not myself then. I never worry about characterization, it comes by itself.  (I must use a strong medium to bring her down from   her high horse and heresy. I reach into my pocket for a small   ancient book, and open to the first page.)  I: Read it. THE CREATURE: One of your tricks? I:   (Striking a light)   Read it. THE   CREATURE:   (Reads)   “The   Actor:   A Treatise on   the Art of Playing.   London. Printed for R.Griffiths, at the Dunciad in St. Paul’s Church-yard MDCCL.” I:   (I   turn   a   few   pages.)   Remember   that MDCCL. Almost 200 years, that ought to impress you. Now read here. THE CREATURE:   (Reads with difficulty the ancient   letters and spelling.)   “The actor who   is   to   express   to   us   a   peculiar passion and its effects, if he wou’d play his character with   truth,   is not only to assume the emotions which that passion wou’d   produce   in   the   generality   of mankind;   but   he   is   to   give   it   that peculiar form—” I:   (Interrupting)   Now   read   louder   and remember— THE CREATURE:   (Does so)   “under which it wou’d appear, when exerting itself in the CHARACTERIZATION 63

breast of such a person as he is giving us the portrait of.”  (A pause. The dear Creature slowly raises her beautiful   eyes, takes out a cigarette, lights it from my lighter, and blows   ‘it out furiously. I know that she will listen now.)  THE   CREATURE:   Well,   what   does   he mean, that 200-year-old anonym? I:   (Not without a slight triumph)   That before you put on your dress and your make-up you must master your characterization. THE   CREATURE:   (Puts   her   arm   under mine, and says   tenderly)   Tell me, how?  (One cannot be angry with her.)   And if you want a cigarette, I’ll give you one. I:   (As if telling a long forgotten fairy tale)   It is like this, my child. The actor creates the whole length of a human souls life on the stage every time he creates a part. This human soul must be visible in all its   aspects,   physical,   mental,   and emotional. Besides, it must be unique. It must   be   the   soul.   The   same   soul   the author thought of, the one the director explained to you, the one you brought to the   surface   from   the   depths   of   your being. No other but that one. And the character who owns this created soul on the stage is unique and different from all the rest. It is Hamlet and nobody else. It is Ophelia and nobody else. They are   human,   that   is   true,   but   here   the similarity ends. We are all human, we have the same number of arms and legs and our 64 THE FOURTH LESSON

noses are placed respectively in the same positions.   Yet,   as   there   are   no   two   oak leaves   alike,   there   are   no   two   human beings alike. And when an actor creates a human soul in the form of a character, he must follow the same wise rule of Nature and make that soul unique and individual. THE CREATURE:   (In self-defence)   Haven’t I done that? I: You have done it in a general way. From your own body, mind, and emotions, you created an image which could have been any   young   girl’s   image.   Sincere, convincing,   powerful,   but   abstract.   It could have been Lisa, Mary, Ann. But it was not Ophelia. The body was that of a young girl, but not Ophelia’s. The mind was   that   of   a   young   girl,   but   not Ophelia’s. It was… THE CREATURE: All wrong. What shall I do now? I: Don’t despair. You have conquered more difficult   things,   this   is   comparatively easy. THE CREATURE:   (Satisfied)   All right. What kind of a body had Ophelia? I: How do I know? You tell me. Who was she? THE   CREATURE:   The   daughter   of   a courtier. I: Which means? THE   CREATURE:   Well   bred,   well controlled, well… fed? CHARACTERIZATION 65

I: You don’t have to worry about the last, but don’t forget the historical elements. A body   with   the   bearing   of   a   chosen creature, with the power and dignity of one   born   to   represent   the   best   of   her kind. Analyze now in detail the posture of your head, go to the galleries or look into books.   Look   at   Van   Dyck,   look   at Reynolds.   Your   arms   and   hands   were natural   and   sincere,   but   I   could   have told   you   right   away   that   those   hands play   tennis,   drive   a   car,   and,   when necessary, can broil a marvelous steak. Study   the   hands   of   Botticelli,   of Leonardo, of Raphael. Then your walk— almost masculine. THE   CREATURE:   Well,   pictures   don’t walk. I: Go and see the procession of nuns in the chapel on Easter night. If you must see everything. THE   CREATURE:   I   know.   But   how   do   I perceive all that and incorporate it into the part? I: Very simply. By studying and making it your   own.   By   entering   into   its   spirit. Study the different hands. Understand their   weakness,   their   flower-like tenderness,   their   narrowness,   their flexibility. You can control your muscles. Just curl your palm longwise. Do you see how   much   narrower   it   is?   Two   days practice and you won’t even think about it, but whenever you want it, it will stay like that as long as you wish. And when, 66 THE FOURTH LESSON

with that kind of hand, you grasp your heart, it will be a different gesture than the one you made. It will be Ophelia’s hand clutching Ophelia’s heart, not Miss So-and-So’s hand grasping Miss So-and- So’s heart. THE   CREATURE:   Can   I   study   and interpret just one picture or can I use different ones? I:   Not   only   different   ones,   but   living, contemporary   personalities   as   well,   in the whole or in part. You can borrow a head from Botticelli, a posture from Van Dyck, use the arms of your sister and the wrists of Angna Enters (the last not as a dancer but as a person). The clouds driven   by   the   wind   can   inspire   your walk.   And   all   of   this   will   make   a composite   creature,   just   as   a   tabloid makes   a   composite   photograph   of   a person or event from a dozen different photographs. THE CREATURE: When is one supposed to do this? I: As a rule, the last two or three days of rehearsal, right at the stage where you are now. Not before you are well settled in the part, and know its structure well. But there are exceptions. Some actors prefer to start with characterization. It is more difficult, that is all. And the result is not so subtle, the choice of elements not so wise as it might be if you followed the inward thread of the part first. It is CHARACTERIZATION 67

like   buying   a   dress   without   being measured. THE CREATURE: How do you make those things acceptable to your own nature? How   do   you   blend   them   all   together? What do you do to make them represent one real, believable person? I: Let me answer you with questions. How did you acquire your good manners? How did you learn to eat with a knife and fork, to sit straight, to keep your hands quiet? How did you adjust yourself last winter to short skirts and this winter to long ones? How do you know how to walk on the golf course in one way and on the ballroom floor in another? How do you learn to use your voice in your own room in one way and in a taxi-cab in another? All those and hundreds of small changes make you what you are, so far as your physical personality   is   concerned.   And for   all   those   things   you   drew   living examples from the life which surrounds you. What I propose is the same thing, done   professionally.   That   means organized study and the appropriation, through   intensive   practice,   of   all   the elements which will make you, in your part,   a   distinct   and   unique   physical personality. THE CREATURE: That is why you told me at the very beginning of our talks that I must   have   absolute   control   of   every muscle in my body so that I would be 68 THE FOURTH LESSON

able to learn quickly and remember all those things? I: Exactly! “Learn quickly and remember,” because   to   acquire   good   manners   you have   a   lifetime;   to   create   your   part physically   but   a   few   days.   THE CREATURE: How about mind? I: Characterization of the mind in the part on the stage is largely a question of the rhythm. The rhythm of thought, I should say. It does not so much concern your character as it concerns the author of that character, the author of the play. THE CREATURE: Do you mean to say that Ophelia should not think? I: I wouldn’t be so rude as that, but I would say that Shakespeare did all the thinking for her. It is his mind at work which you should   characterize   while   acting Ophelia,   or   for   that   matter,   any Shakespearean   character.   The   same goes for any author who has a mind of his own. THE CREATURE: I never thought of that. I always tried to think the way I imagined the character would think. I: That is a mistake which almost every actor   commits.   Except   geniuses—who know better. The most powerful weapon of an author is his mind. The quality of it, the speed, alertness, depth, brilliancy. All   of   that   counts,   without   regard   to whether he is writing words of Caliban or those   of   Jeanne   d’Arc,   or   those   of Osvald. A good writer’s fool is no more CHARACTERIZATION 69

foolish than his creator’s mind, and a prophet no more wise than the man who conceived him. Do you remember   Romeo and   Juliet?   Lady   Capulet   says   about Juliet “She’s not fourteen”. And then a few pages later Juliet speaks. “My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as deep; the more I give to thee,   The   more   I   have,   for   both   are infinite.” Confucius   could   have   said   that,   or Buddha, or St. Francis. If you will try acting Juliet’s part in a way which characterizes her   mind   as   a   fourteen-year-old   mind, you’ll be lost. If you try to make her older you’ll   ruin   Shakespeare’s   theatrical conception which is that of a genius. If you try to explain it by the early maturity of Italian women, by the wisdom of the Italian Renaissance, and so forth, you will be all tangled up in archaeology and history, and your inspiration will be gone. All you have to do is to grasp the characterization of Shakespeare’s mind and follow it. THE CREATURE: How would you describe the quality of it? I: A mind of lightning-like speed. Highly concentrated,   authoritative,   even   in moments   of   doubt.   Spontaneous,   the first   thought   is   always   the   last   one. Direct   and   outspoken.   Don’t misunderstand   me,   I’m   not   trying   to 70 THE FOURTH LESSON

describe or explain Shakespeare’s mind. No words can describe it. All I am trying to   do   is   to   tell   you   that   whatever character of Shakespeare you perform, its mind (not yours but the character’s) must   have   those   qualities   in   its manifestation. You don’t have to think like   Shakespeare,   but   the   outward quality of thinking must be his. It is like portraying an acrobat. You don’t have to know how to stand on your head, but all the   movements   of   your   body   must convey the idea that you are able to turn somersaults whenever you wish to do it. THE CREATURE: Would you say the same if I had to act in a Bernard Shaw play? I: Precisely More so in Shaw’s case. His peasants,   clerks,   and   girls   think   like scholars,   his   saints   and   kings   and bishops like lunatics and monsters. Your portrayal of Shavian character would be incomplete   unless   the   mind   of   that character,   embodied   in   its   ways, continued attack and defence, continued provocation   for   argument,   right   or wrong. THE CREATURE: Sort of an Irish mind. I:   There   you   are.   You   have   explained   it much better than I. THE CREATURE: How do you apply that practically to a part? I: As I have told you before, it is mostly the rhythm   or   organized   energy   of   your delivery   of   the   author’s   words.   After studying him and rehearsing him for a CHARACTERIZATION 71

length of time, you ought to know the movement of the author’s thoughts. They must   affect   you.   You   must   like   them. Their rhythm must infect yours. Try to under stand   the   author.   Your   training and nature will take care of the rest. THE CREATURE: Can you apply the same rule of characterization to the emotions of a character? I: Oh, no. The emotion of a character is the only sphere where the author should pay attention   to   the   actor’s   demands   and adjust   his   writings   to   the   actor’s interpretation. Or, an actor is justified in adjusting the author’s writing to achieve the best results for his own emotional outline of the part. THE CREATURE: Don’t say that aloud. All the authors will murder you. I: The wise ones won’t. Emotion is God’s breath in a part. Through emotion, the author’s characters stand alive and vital. The wise author does everything to make this part of creation in the theatre as harmonious as possible, without ruining the idea and purpose of the play. Gilbert Emery told me that he threw out two and a half pages from his play   Tarnish,   in a big scene between Ann Harding and Tom Powers. He did it because Ann Harding could bring herself and the audience to tears   much   better   by   simply   listening silently, than by answering every speech of   Powers   with   another speech   of   the same importance. Gilbert Emery chose 72 THE FOURTH LESSON

wisely between the emotion of an actress and his writing. Clemence Dane gave me permission to cut out every superfluous word in   Granite   for stage presentation. No, the authors won’t murder me. They know that you, and I, and all like us work for them in the theatre. THE CREATURE: But emotions must be characterized just as clearly as body and mind. What is the proper way to do that? I:   When   you   have   mastered   the   general human emotions in the part, as you have in your Ophelia, when you know when and   why   anger   comes,   or   pleading, sorrow,   joy,   or   despair,   whatever   the case   demands,   when   it   is   all   clear   to you, start to look for one fundamental quality:   freedom   in   expressing   your emotions.   Absolute,   unlimited   freedom and   ease.   That   freedom   will   be   your characterization   of   the   emotions   at hand. When the inward structure of your part is well prepared and built, when you have mastered its outward appearance, when the manifestation of the thoughts of   your   character   is   in   perfect   accord with the authors way of thinking, watch during rehearsals to see when and where your   emotions   rise   and   flame   with difficulty. Look for reasons. There may be many. Your fundamentals may not be strong,   you   may   not   understand   the action.   You   may   be   physically uncomfortable,   the   words   may   disturb you—their   quality   or   quantity—the CHARACTERIZATION 73

movement may distract you, you may be lacking in the means of expression. Find the reason for yourself and eliminate it. Let me give you an example. What scene in Ophelia do you feel least comfortable in? THE   CREATURE:   The   third   act,   the performance scene. I: All right. What is the action? THE CREATURE: To be insulted. I: Wrong. To preserve your dignity. Ophelia is a courtier’s daughter. The Prince of the reigning   house   is   making   unsuitable remarks to her publicly. He is master of her life, the more because she loves him. He can do whatever he pleases. But even if it pleases him to kill her, she will die with the dignity appropriate to her state. Your main action is not to break down, not   to   show   weakness,   or   to   display publicly   your   intimate   emotion.   Don’t forget, the whole court watches Ophelia. Take all that now as your action. Can you find it in yourself easily? THE CREATURE: Yes. I: Is the rest all right? Are you comfortable in your seat? Do words come easily into your mind? Are you vital enough to think with Shakespearean boldness? THE CREATURE: Yes, yes. I have it. Let me do it for you.  (Suddenly behind our backs a voice arises. An old,   shalvy, but trained and rich voice, trembling with the   expectation of something  74 THE FOURTH LESSON

big,   decisive,   half   absent   from   its   own sound.)  “Lady, shall I lie in your lap”…  (I   turn   around.   The   old   doorman   is standing behind   us.)  THE CREATURE:   (Like a frozen sea. Calm and terrific   in its rigidity.)   “No, my lord.” THE   DOORMAN:   (Still   tense   with expectation, but I   can sense a trace of sorrow and pity toward the beloved one.)  “I mean, my head upon your lap.” THE CREATURE:   (You are my master. You are within   your rights.)   “Aye, my lord.” THE DOORMAN:   (The pain is behind that voice now.   He must go on with assumed madness. He must hurt one he   doesn’t want to hurt, to convince the others.)   “Do you think I meant country matters?” THE   CREATURE:   (The   apotheosis   of dignity.   If   I   have   to   die,   I   will   think nothing, my lord.)   “I think nothing, my lord.”  (A few speeches more, and the scene is finished. Fast,   terrific, tense. Just right. The Creature jumps from the seat   and whirls along the aisle.)  THE CREATURE: I have it, I have it now! It’s   so   simple.   I   felt   easier   than   ever before. It’s just nothing. THE DOORMAN:   (His sad old eyes blinking at   her)   It’s   nothing,   Miss—when   you know it. CHARACTERIZATION 75

THE CREATURE: Oh, Pa, you were very good. How do you happen to know all the cues? THE DOORMAN: I have played with all the big players for the last forty years. I have played almost every part in all the big plays. I studied them all, I worked hard. But I did not have time to perfect myself or   to   think   about   all   the   things   this gentleman   has   told   you.   Now,   when   I have time to think, and I plunge back into   years   gone   by,   I   know   all   my mistakes, and the reasons, and the ways of doing. But there is nothing to apply them to; I try to keep my door shut the best I can. And when I see and hear the young actors struggling, I think always… Oh, if youth knew, and if age could do, what a   wonderful   world   it   would   be.   I have enjoyed your talk, sir. Everything was true, very true. I: I am honored, sir. THE   DOORMAN:   Now   begging   your pardon,   would   you   please   take   your leave,   sir.   It’s   time   for   rehearsal.   (He finishes with a sly, dreamy smile which covers his old face   with wrinkles.)  “The actors are come hither, my lord—The best actors in the world…” 76 THE FOURTH LESSON

THE FIFTH LESSON OBSERVATION  W e   are   having   tea,   the   Creature’s   Aunt, “who knew   Mr. Belasco personally”, and myself. We are expecting the Creature at any moment. The tea is excellent.  THE AUNT: I think it charming of you to take such an interest in my niece. The child   is   so   absorbed   in   the   theatre. Especially   now   that   she   is   successful. Can you imagine, she is getting a regular salary. I never thought it possible in the theatre. I: Just the law of supply and demand. THE   AUNT:   I   must   confess,   I   don’t understand   what   she   wants   from   you now.   She   is   a   “professional”.   She   has received good notices. She has a good part. What else can she ask? Not that I don’t   enjoy   the   pleasure   of your company, now and then. And I’m sure my niece does. We both adore the theatre   and   its   people.   The   late   Mr. Belasco—what a charming man he was—

said to me once when I considered taking a   part   in   one   of   his   productions “Madame, you belong to opening nights. Your presence in an orchestra seat is just as vital to the play’s success as the best performance of all my actors.” It was so cute   of   him.   The   man   was   a   genius. Would you believe that I never miss an opening night of a successful play? I: It’s very kind of you, Madame. THE AUNT: Not at all. I’m doing everything to promote— (she almost sings it…. The tea is unbearably hot.)   a b-e-a-u-t-i-f-u-l art of the theatre. Shakespeare…. Noel Coward… And what an actor Alexander Woollcott has turned out to be. I: He has studied hard, Madame. THE   AUNT:   Unquestionably.   And   in   the right way. He watched actors for years. He   remembered   their   tricks.   Then   he took a part and started to act it. Now, if he would just act and act every day as much   as   he   could,   he   would   be remarkable.  (I gulp the tea which,for some reason, gets hotter and   hotter. I am preparing to ask for another cup when the   Creature enters. She stops in the middle of the room to look   us over. There is doubt in her expression.)  THE CREATURE: And may I ask what you two were talking about? 78 THE FIFTH LESSON

THE AUNT: About the theatre, my dear, about   (she   sings   again,   and   rolls   her eyes)   a b-e-a-u-t-i-f-u-l theatre. THE   CREATURE:   (With   a   slightly   grim humor)   Then I hope you agreed. I: We were getting ready to disagree when you entered. Your Aunt, my dear, just made   the   statement   that   all   that   is necessary to become an actor is to act, act, and act. Am I correct? THE AUNT: I know that I am right. I don’t believe in all the theories and lectures, psychological   analyses,   and   brain- befuddling exercises my niece has told me about. You’ll have to forgive me; I’m a straightforward person. And I adore the theatre. But my theory is: To be an actor one must act. So act all you can,—as long as it pays. When it doesn’t pay,— stop acting. And that’s that. If one has talent, like this child here… THE CREATURE: Auntie… THE   AUNT:   That’s   all   right,   my   dear. Talent needs advertising like everything else. If one has talent the pay will last for a long time. I: I’m glad, Madame, you give talent such a boost.   But,   if   I   may   ask,   don’t   you consider   that   talent   needs   cultivation, that   only   through   cultivation   can   one discover the presence of talent? THE CREATURE:   (Picking up my thought heartily)   Auntie, dear, it’s just like a wild apple and a cultivated apple. They are both apples, but one is green, hard and OBSERVATION 79

sour, and the other red, soft, sweet, and fragrant. THE   AUNT:   To   argue   with   poetical comparisons is unfair, my dear. An apple is one thing… I:   (Continuing quickly)   And talent another. You are quite right. Let’s not compare. Let’s have a pleasant teatime. May I ask for another cup? Thank you.   (I   receive a full cup of delightful tea, with cream and sugar,   then I continue.)   May I ask you, Madame,   if   you   ever   heard   of   a   new delightful game which is played much in German   Kindergartens,   called  Achtungspiele?  THE AUNT: No, what is it? I: A very simple game. The teacher makes the   children   repeat   snatches   of   their activities, things they have done today, yesterday, a few days ago. It serves the pur pose   of   developing   the   pupil’s memory,   analyzing   his   actions,   and sharpening   his   sense   of   observation. Sometimes the child is allowed to make its   own   choice,   and   then   the   teacher makes   her   conclusion   as   to   what direction the child’s interest takes, and either develops it or warns the parents and   other   teachers   about   it.   For instance,   the   child   who   chooses   to remember how it destroyed a bird’s nest is not punished, but an effort is made to shift its interest into a different sphere. THE   AUNT:   (Like   a   glacier)   Very interesting. 80 THE FIFTH LESSON

I: Oh, not half as interesting as when you try   it   on   the   grown-ups.   Interesting because it shows how little we grown- ups   use   a   wonderful   natural   gift,   the ability for observation. Would you believe that very few persons can remember how they have acted for the last twenty-four hours? THE   AUNT:   Incredible.   I   can   tell   you exactly   what   I   have   done   for   the   last twenty-four years. I: Oh, yes, you could   tell   me, I’m sure. But the   game   is   not   to   tell   but   silently   to perform,   to   re-enact.   Silence   helps concentration   and   brings   out   hidden emotions. THE AUNT: I could do it silently if I wanted to. Though I’m not so sure that I would want   to.   I’m   a   straightforward, outspoken person. I: Why not try? It’s just a childish game. Would you be willing? THE AUNT: Oh, I’ll try anything. I: Splendid. We all will try. Let us start on something   easy.   For   instance…for instance, may I ask you to re-enact the process   of   serving   me   with   that delightful   cup   of   tea   which   I   received from your hands a minute ago— THE   AUNT:   How   ridiculous.   (She laughs heartily.)   A very cute idea. You want me really to go back to Kindergarten. I: Not at all, Madame. It’s just a game. The next test will be mine or your talented niece’s. OBSERVATION 81

THE CREATURE: Oh, please, Auntie, I’m curious. THE   AUNT:   All   right.   It’s   a   gloomy afternoon anyhow. Now observe me.   (She begins like a high priestess or   Macbeth’s witch, almost rolling back her sleeves.)  Here is the cup…   (I interrupt.)  I: Silently, please. No words, just actions. THE AUNT: Oh, yes, I forgot. The mystery of silence.   (She is a sarcastic old lady. But she has made up her   mind, and she is going   to   show   us   up — she   begins.   Her fore-head is wrinkled. The thoughts are working.   She   takes   a   cup   in   her   right hand, reaches for a teapot with her left, realizes   her blunder, exclaims candidly “Oh, my God”, puts the cup   back, takes the teapot in her right hand, holds it in the air. I   whisper between two sips of tea —)  I:   Don’t   touch   anything,   please.   Just   go through the actions…. THE AUNT: I’m doing that exactly. I: Then kindly put down the teapot. THE AUNT: Oh, yes.   (She puts it down and lays both   hands on the table, jerks them off   immediately,   and   with   maddening speed indicates the motions of taking the cup and   pouring a drop of tea into it. Then without placing the pot   on the table adds imaginary   cream   and   lemon   from respective containers, and hands me the cup   by   its   handle,   obviously   having forgotten the saucer and the sugar. The Creature   shrieks   in   unrestrained  82 THE FIFTH LESSON

laughter, and throwing her   arms around her Aunt’s neck, kisses her many times. I finish   my cup of tea.)  THE AUNT: It’s just silly, that’s all. I: No, Madame. It’s just an uncultivated gift of observation. Will you allow your niece   to   re-enact   your   actions   of   the same   event?   And   as   you   know,   she couldn’t foresee that I would choose this particular one. So she will have to do her best unprepared, please. THE   CREATURE:   Can   I   tell   it?   I’m   so excited,—at you and Auntie getting along so nicely, that I couldn’t t possibly keep silent. I:   Yes,   you   can   tell   it,   because   it’s somebody else’s action. If it were your own I would insist on your reenacting it in silence. The gift of observation must be cultivated in every part of your body, not only in your sight, and memory. THE CREATURE: Auntie, when B. asked you for a cup of tea, you smiled at him. Then you looked at the teapot as if trying to make sure that there was any more tea, then you looked at me and smiled again as if saying “Isn’t he cute?” THE AUNT:   (Booms loudly)   I did not. I: You did, Madame. I remember it well. It was my only encouragement from you. THE CREATURE: Then you looked again at B. as if waiting for him to hand you his cup. But he did not. I: I’m sorry. OBSERVATION 83

THE CREATURE: Then you held your wide right sleeve   with   your   left   hand   and reached over to the tray for a fresh cup. Took it, holding it on the saucer, and placed   it   in   front   of   you.   Then,   still holding your sleeve, you took the teapot. It was quite heavy, so you put it down and   got   a   better   grip   on   the   handle. Brought it over the cup, let your sleeve go, took the strainer,—placing it over the cup. Then, holding the cover of the teapot with the fingers of your left hand, you started to pour the tea. The cover was hot and you changed your fingers one after another.   When   the   teacup   was   three- quarters   full,   you   placed   the   teapot nearer to you and smiled again, this time at nobody in particular. Then you poured cream with your right hand and dropped in two lumps of sugar, holding the tongs in your left. You handed the cup to B. and   placed   the   tongs   on   a   dish   with lemon,   right   where   you   can   see   them now. THE AUNT:   (Seriously offended)   One would think you were in the theatre, you must have studied me. I: No. Please don’t be cross. I assure you there was no premeditation.   (I turn to the Creature.)   You   forgot   to   mention   that your Aunt could not find the cream right away,   and   for   a   fraction   of   a   second looked all over the table for it. THE   CREATURE:   Yes,   and   you   were playing with your napkin all the time. 84 THE FIFTH LESSON

THE AUNT:   (Laughs heartily. She is a good sport, after   all.)   Aha! So you didn’t escape scrutiny either. I: I didn’t try to, Madame. I was intently watching your niece exercising her gift of observation. THE   AUNT:   And   you   taught   her   that childish game just to watch her pranks. I: Madame, I did not teach her anything. We both work in the theatre. And the theatre is   one   place   where   teaching   and preaching   are   absolutely   excluded. Practice   is   what   counts,   and   only practice. THE AUNT: Just what I say. Act! act! and you’ll be an actor. I: No. To act is the final result of a long procedure, Madame. Practice everything which   precedes   and   leads   toward   this result. When you act, it is too late. THE AUNT:   (Caustically)   And what, if I may ask, has that gift of observation to do with acting, if you please? I: A great deal. It helps a student of the theatre to notice everything unusual and out of the ordinary in every-day life. It builds his memory, his storage mem ory, with   all   visible   manifestations   of   the human spirit. It makes him sensitive to sincerity and to make-believe. It develops his sensory and muscular memory, and facilitates   his   adjustment   to   any business he may be required to do in a part. It opens his eyes to the full extent in appreciation of different personalities OBSERVATION 85

and values in people and works of art. And lastly, Madame, it enriches his inner life by full and extensive consumption of everything in outward life. It has the same effect that one banana and a handful of rice, as a day’s food, have on a Hindu follower of Yoga. Consumed rightly, getting the maximum energy out of that miserable   amount   of   vitamins,   that   food gives   to   a   Hindu   immeasurable   energy, spiritual power, and vitality. We consume a steak at lunch, and imagine at dinnertime that we are hungry. We go through life in the same manner. We think that we see everything,   and   we   don’t   assimilate anything.   But   in   the   theatre,   where   we have to re-create life, we can’t afford that. We are obliged to notice the material with which we work. THE AUNT: So you tell my niece to notice how her Aunt pours a cup of tea, and then you both make fun of her.   (I see a twinkle in her eye; she is a good sport.)  THE CREATURE: Oh, Auntie, dear, not at all. He was just joking. THE AUNT: I know a joke when I see it. He is darn serious, and so am I. I: No, you are not. Otherwise I wouldn’t read   in   your   eyes   the   invitation   to continue. You are amused. I appreciate that. I cannot teach, but I will endeavor 86 THE FIFTH LESSON

to amuse you. Your gift of observation will do the rest. THE   AUNT:   (Graciously)   If   you   want another cup of tea, pour it yourself. I: Thank you.   (I do it, and Auntie watches me like a   hawk. After I am through — )  Madame, I realize that for the first time you have given me your full attention. I’ll make use of it. You adore the theatre. We,   your   niece   and   I,   work   for   the theatre and in the theatre. When you go to an opening night, you go out shopping and choose the most suitable dress. We shop   in   life   every   day   and   choose   the most suitable things for every night that we spend in the theatre. To us, they are all opening nights. They all command us to be at our best. The actor who has his gift   of   observation   dulled   and   inactive will appear in wornout dress on a gala occasion.   As   a   rule,   I   believe   that inspiration is the result of hard work, but the only thing which can stimulate inspiration in an actor is constant and keen observation every day of his life. THE AUNT: Do you mean to say that great actors   walk   through   life   spying   on   all their   acquaintances,   relatives,   and passers-by? I:   I’m   afraid   they   do,   Madame.   Besides, they spy on themselves, too. THE CREATURE: How otherwise could we know   what   we   can   do   and   what   we can’t? OBSERVATION 87

THE AUNT: We are speaking   about great  actors, my child. THE CREATURE: Oh, poor me, poor me. What   a   blow.   (She   pouts   humorously.)  Auntie, are you through with advertising me? THE AUNT: You are a spoiled creature. I: She is a marvelous creature. Allow me to advertise her a little. I won’t overdo it. I’ll tell you only how we both developed, and made   important   observations   in   our craft.   Your   niece   had   the   part   of   the blind girl in   The Cricket on the Hearth.  She rehearsed it well, but nobody ever believed that she was blind! She came to me and we went out to find a blind man. We found one on the Bowery. He sat at the   corner.   He   did   not   move for   four hours. We waited for him to go because we wanted to see him walking,—finding his way. To ask him to move wouldn’t be good.   He   would   be   self-conscious.   For the   sake   of   art   we   risked   hunger, pneumonia (it was chilly), loss of time. Finally the beggar got up and went home. We   followed   him   there,   it   took   another hour, gave him a dollar for his involuntary service to us, and left highly enriched in experience.   But   the   price   of   it,   not counting even the dollar, was too big. In the theatre, one cannot spend four hours waiting for beggars. One must pick up and store experiences for all emergencies at all 88 THE FIFTH LESSON

times. One must start from the beginning so… THE CREATURE: I decided, Auntie, on a plan, and B. approved of it. I: Exactly. Go ahead and tell it, it’s your contribution. THE CREATURE: I decided that for three months, from twelve to one every day, wherever I happened to be and whatever I   might   be   doing,   I   would   observe everything   and   everybody   around   me. And from one to two, during my lunch time, I would recall the observations of the   previous   day.   If   I   happened   to   be alone I would reenact, like the German children, my own past actions. I do not do it any more except occasionally, but in three months’ time I became as rich in experiences as Croesus in gold. At first I tried to jot them down, now I don’t even need   to   do   that.   Everything   registers automatically somewhere in my brain, and through the practice of recalling and re- enacting I’m ten times as alert as I was. And life is so much more wonderful. You don’t know how rich and wonderful it is. THE   AUNT:   You   ought   to   change   your career, my child. You ought to become a detective. I: Madame, isn’t every produced play and every acted part a discovery of hidden OBSERVATION 89

values and treasures? The unveiling of virtues   and   vices,   the   control   of passions? A fourth wall removed from a room? A battle-field exposed? The grave of “Poor Yorick” dug out? THE AUNT: Well, well, well.   (Not entirely convinced)   Still,   somehow,   it   doesn’t sound   real   to   me.   Very   theoretical. Bookish. In my estimation the ways of the theatre, and all other arts for that matter, ought to be natural. We don’t do those things in life. I: Forgive me, let’s drop the subject. Your niece tells me your sister has just come back   from   abroad.   Did   you   find   her rested, looking well, when you met her at the pier? THE AUNT: Oh, yes, thank you. She was rested all right, but as for looks!—That woman will be the death of me! She is the champion worst dresser in New York. Can   you   imagine;   she   had   on   a   beige Eugenie hat with a dull mauve plume. And a narrow purple satin ribbon flecked with   silver.   Even   tiny   silver   marcasite clasps on the side. She wore a travelling outfit   of   checked   velveteen—small checks, first a brown line, then a grey, then a purple, on a background of a dull mocha color… I:   (Interrupting rudely)   Madame, what you have   said   just   now   shows   a   gift   of observation,   cultivated   and   used   quite naturally in real life. In the theatre we do the   same   thing,   making   our   circle   of 90 THE FIFTH LESSON

observation as wide as possible. We use everything, and everybody, as an object, the only difference being that we never talk about it, we act it. THE AUNT:   (Sighs softly, and changes the subject of the   conversation to the Horse Show   at   Madison   Square   Garden.   We finish   tea   in   peace   and   mutual agreement.   The   Creature   is   silent   and thoughtful.)  OBSERVATION 91

THE SIXTH LESSON RHYTHM  T he Creature put it to   me bluntly.  THE CREATURE: If you have any longing for beauty you’ll go with me and see it. I: The only time I indulge in a longing for beauty is between seven and eight in the morning…. THE CREATURE:   (Even more bluntly)   I’ll be at your door tomorrow morning at seven- fifteen. • • • • • •  At   twenty   minutes   to   eight   today   the Creature and I   find ourselves standing at the top of the Empire State   Building. Far below,   innumerable   arms   of   stone   are desperately   reaching   for   the   sky.   In   the distance, the same sky   is gently descending toward green fields and a pearly sea   but they seem to make no effort to reach it. The Creature   and   I   are   most   entertainingly silent. After a while we sit   down.

I: I’m certainly grateful to you. THE CREATURE: I knew you would like it….   (Suddenly, very shrewdly) …And I knew   you would explain it to me. You will   have   to   explain   it   to   yourself anyhow; that is, if you register “all this” emotionally the way I do. I: Suppose I am not able to explain? And suppose I register “all this” emotionally quite differently from you? THE CREATURE: Exactly what I hope will happen. I: May I ask why? THE CREATURE: You may. First, because if you are not able to explain a thing you always lean on me for support, proof, or clarification. I am your “Exhibit A.” This makes   me   feel   important   and   wise.   A marvelous feeling, almost like receiving a fan letter. I think I’ll be able to help you— this time as usual.   (In her gaze I feel a deal of pride and gratitude. Well hidden though,   behind   a   youthful   challenge.)  Second, if you feel anything differently we will plunge into an argument—and I rather   think   you   profit   by   my arguments. As a matter of fact, without my   arguments,   I   cannot   imagine   what you would do.   (She must be happy. She is positively defiant   today.)  I: Probably I would invent arguments. THE   CREATURE:   An   extremely   difficult and dangerous procedure. You might not be able to invent them and even if you did,   they   might   not   be   real   and RHYTHM 93

convincing.   It   is   only   human   to   be prejudiced toward one’s own arguments. I: It is only human to be prejudiced toward arguments used against us, as well. THE   CREATURE:   Yes,   but   that   kind   of prejudice is an incentive for ones own strength and convictions. Isn’t it? I:   In   life,   yes.   And   in   the   arts,   the straightest and most practical answer is also yes—especially in the theatre. THE CREATURE: Is that because on the stage, resistance and conflict of actions are the essential elements of its life? I: Precisely. Suppose in the first act of   The Merchant   of Venice,   Antonio should pay the   money   on   the   dot,   change   his religion,   and   ask   for   the   hand   of Jessica…. Don’t   laugh.   I   am   serious. That is an exaggerated example. Here is a legitimate one: “How all occasions do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge! …Rightly to be great Is not to stir without great argument, But greatly to find quarrel in a straw When honour’s at the stake.” Which   is   Hamlet —Act   IV,   Scene   IV.   All through Shakespeare you can find those marvelous sign posts for the actor. They are wisely concealed in the text of the plays —not displayed in a multitude of boastful 94 THE SIXTH LESSON

directions.   In   those   two   lines—the   first which   come   to   mind—you   see   the straightest   advice:   No   action   without conflict! THE CREATURE: And is that stimulant of action the sole secret of a successful play or acting? I:   Oh,   no.   This   is   only   a   theoretical beginning. An A.B. C. so to speak. In the theatre   I   call   it   “Mr.   What”—rather   a deadly   personality   without   his   mate, “How”. It is only when “How” appears on the stage that things begin to happen. The conflict of actions may be   presented  on the stage and remain there petrified awaiting   an   answer   to   the   question: “What is the theme of the play?” In which case   it   is   not   theatre.   But   the   same conflict may be   created   with unexpected spontaneity, with uncalculated impulse and it will plunge the audience into a feverish state of partisanship toward one side or another. It will force them to find their own living and excited answer. This will be theatre. And the secret is not in the question: “What is the theme of the play?” but in the statement: “This is how the   theme   perseveres   or   does   not persevere through all obstacles.” THE   CREATURE:   You   are,   of   course, speaking   about   what   happens   in performance itself when you mention the “unexpected   spontaneity   and uncalculated impulse”. You don’t mean during the preparation of the play and RHYTHM 95

the working rehearsals. You have always told me that inspiration and spontaneity are results of calculation and practice. I: I am still inclined to believe so. I am speaking about the performance itself. THE CREATURE: All right. Now I want an explanation from you. Why do we stand, for I don’t know how long, here on the top of the Empire State Building; silent, awed, bewildered, exhilarated? The view from   here   is   remarkable   but   not unexpected. I knew it before I actually saw   it—from   hundreds   of   photographs and   newsreels.   I   have   flown   over Manhattan in an airplane; moreover, I live in a twenty-third story penthouse. I have   seen   it   before.   Why   is   the impression so great? I: Because that remarkable “How” has had a finger in the affair. THE   CREATURE:   You   seem   to   be enthusiastic   about   this   “How”.   I’ll   be jealous. I:   You   may   well   be.   Let   me   show   you “How’s” ways and means as opposed to those of “What”. “What” would take you from   the   street   level   of   that   boiling, screeching, clanging, arguing city of New York to the window of the first floor of the   Empire   State   Building.   He   would open the window and say to you, “This, my child, is the first of the hundred and two floors of this building. As you see, the   difference   between   the   level commonly known as the street level, and 96 THE SIXTH LESSON

the   first   floor   is   slight.   Exactly   twenty feet. You hear the same noises. You see almost the same view. You do not feel much   separation   from   the   squirming mass of humanity below. Let’s go to the second floor.” THE CREATURE:   (In horror)   What? I: “To the second floor, my child,” is the answer of “What”, and no sooner said than done. You   are   on the second floor. A slight change in the analysis of the height and   difference   in   view   follows.   Then “What”,   with   appropriate   explanations, takes you to the third floor, fourth floor, and so on until you reach the hundred and second… THE   CREATURE:   Oh,   no.   I   beg   your pardon.   He   does   not   take   me   to   the fourth floor, and so on. I: “What” is very persistent, I assure you. THE CREATURE: That doesn’t matter. On the third floor, exactly, I take him gently by   the   neck   and   push   him   over   the window-sill toward the level “commonly known as the street level”. Curtain. I:   But   suppose   you   did   go   with   him through all the hundred and two floors? Can you imagine your emotions then, in the face of this splendor? THE CREATURE: I presume there would be none. I: Why? Where would be the difference? Let us   try   and   find   out.   You   would   climb each   step   logically.   You   would understand   where   you   were   and   how RHYTHM 97

high   you   were.   You   would   realize   the gradual   change.   You   would be,   as   a matter   of   fact,   thoroughly   advised   on every detail of this remarkable structure. Why   do   you   think   there   would   be   no emotion? THE CREATURE: I really don’t know, but I hate the very idea of it. I: May I ask “How” to bring us here? THE CREATURE: Please. I: We are taken along the street. The City rushes to work. No, more than that. It stampedes   toward   the   havens   of existence,   to   the   places   of   its   “jobs”. “Jobs” which will give to every man in the   city—bread,   a   roof,   hope   in   the daytime,   quiet   sleep   at   night.   Those things seem as precious to them as black pearls to a diver. Everybody is afraid to miss   the   time-clock,   to   lose   his   work. Terrific tension in steps, gestures, faces, and words. There are exactly so many minutes   to   make   so   many   miles.   One cannot stop for a second and compare his own frenzied speed with the serene speed of the sun or wind or sea. To give oneself courage one must shriek and yell and laugh loudly and falsely. As if not satisfied with that manifestation, all   the   conceivable   means   of   sound production   lash   one’s   eardrums.   Rivets, horns,   bells,   grind   of   gears   and high- pitched   groans   of   brakes,   whistles, gongs   and   sirens—all   seem   to   yell   in   a 98 THE SIXTH LESSON

steady rhythm, “Go to work—right away. Go   to   work—right   away.”   It   is   like   two- fourths time in music repeated endlessly— with ever increasing volume. We are part of that rhythm. We walk faster. We breathe faster. Whatever words you say to me, you flash like radio signals. I answer you with speed. Finally we arrive at the door of the Empire   State   Building   and   we   find ourselves   struggling.   It   is   so   difficult   to tear   ourselves   away   from   the   surging currents of arms, legs, and faces, and turn inside. It takes an effort, but we do it. In a flash we find ourselves in a box of an elevator— cut off as if with a knife from the   world   behind.   I   could   compare   that feeling   with   the   forte   fortissimo   of   an orchestra, cut off by the master hand of a conductor, to be resumed by the tender  sostenuto   of violins. How long it lasts, we do not know. We are alone. We shoot up through space. We change elevators. We shoot up again. The upward flash of those hundred   and   two   floors   seems   like   two winks of an eye. Almost two seconds in silence—in repose. The door opens. We find ourselves here, suspended from the sky by man’s genius—separated from the earth by the result of his labor. Wherever we look, space flows, inviting to the eye and thought. We are not forced to accept any direction, any command, any limits.   We   are   yanked   out   from   the measures of Scriabine’s   Prelude,   in fifteen- eighths   time,   with   its   torturing RHYTHM 99

temptations,   and   thrown   suddenly   on   a broad, streaming magic carpet, to float in the   air   to   the   rhythm   of   a   steady   wind which   seems   to   sing   out,   in   measured intervals, one word, “Space”. Our spirit is raised in an upward flash from torment to bliss. THE CREATURE: And “How” is responsible for   that   upward   two-winks-of-eye “flash”—which seems to produce such a remarkable result. I: Aren’t you grateful? And don’t you realize “How’s” importance? THE   CREATURE:   Yes.   (Slowly   thinking)  Importance to what? I: To our profession. THE CREATURE: Are you serious? I: As serious as if I were telling you a joke. THE CREATURE: How do I know—maybe you are. After all, “How”—it’s ridiculous. I: Do you want a learned, much abused, common name for “How”? THE CREATURE: I’ll be delighted. I:   Rhythm!  THE   CREATURE:   (Her   usual,   charmingly humorous   self)   I’ve   heard   the   name somewhere—but   I’ve   never   had   the pleasure. I: Neither had I. Jaques Dalcroze told me a great deal about Rhythm in Music and in Dancing,   two   arts   in   which   it   is   the essential   and   vital   element.   I   found   a book on Rhythm in Architecture; it is not 100 THE SIXTH LESSON

translated into English. Those were the only two reliable and practical guides to that great element of every art. Critics occasionally mention rhythm in painting and sculpture, but I have never heard it explained. In the theatre the mechanical word “Tempo” is substituted, but it has nothing   to   do   with   Rhythm.   If Shakespeare   had   cast   those   two,   he would have written: Rhythm—the Prince of Arts.Tempo—his bastard Brother. THE CREATURE: Splendid. Now I want to know all about both of them. I: You would never believe the countless hours I spend trying to define Rhythm so that it can be applied to all the arts. THE CREATURE: Have you succeeded? I: Not yet. The nearest I have come to it is  the   orderly, measurable changes of all the different elements   comprised in a work of art—provided   that   all   those   changes progressively   stimulate   the   attention   of the spectator and   lead invariably to the final aim of the artist.  THE CREATURE: Sounds methodical. I: Because it is the beginning of a thought. I do not claim that it is a final definition. I beg you to think about it and find a better one. Put it to your friends. I’ll be grateful for it. We will all be. Meantime, I would like you to attack mine. It will give me a chance to defend it. THE CREATURE: All right. You say first: “Orderly and measurable”—but suppose RHYTHM 101

I am creating “Chaos”? How can it be orderly and measurable? I:   You   forget   the   word   “changes”.   Your work of art, “Chaos”, if it is such, must consist   of   a   number   of   conflicting actions. They may be as disorderly as your   genius   will   let   them   be.   But   the “changes” from one to another must be orderly. And that is exactly what only a genius can make them. If you remember Michelangelo’s frescoes on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, you remember that from the floor looking upward they give a perfect impression of “Chaos”, prototype of creation. Take a reproduction of those frescoes and spread it before you on the table.   One   look   will   be   sufficient   to convince you that it is “Chaos” composed of   the   most   “orderly   and   measurable” changes of all the elements involved. THE CREATURE: I do remember. You are right.   But   I’ll   be   scrupulous.   What   do you mean by “changes”? Fluctuations? I: No, not fluctuations. Precisely changes. Perhaps   I   can   explain   myself   more clearly by another example. You recall Leonardo’s “Last Supper”? THE CREATURE: I do. Very well, indeed. I studied the movement of all the hands in it. I knew them by heart and could use all of them freely and naturally. I: Very well then. The element here is   the hand.   It changes its position twenty-six times.   Twenty-three   visible   and   three invisible. If you knew all the positions by 102 THE SIXTH LESSON

heart and could freely change from one to another, building up their significance with each change, you would achieve a Rhythm of that particular masterpiece. THE CREATURE: Isn’t that exactly what Isadora   Duncan   did,   and   what   Angna Enters does now? I: It is. THE   CREATURE:   I   see.   One   more question.   On   the   canvas   of   the   “Last Supper” the hands change, but at the same time they are stationary. How can you   apply   the   word   Rhythm   to   them? Isn’t Rhythm applied to movement? I: There is no limitation. A glacier moves two inches in a century; a swallow flies two miles in a minute—they both have Rhythm.   Expand   the   idea   from   the glacier   to   a   theoretical   standstill   and from the swallow to a theoretical light- speed.   Rhythm   will   include   and   carry them all within its scope. To exist is to have Rhythm. THE   CREATURE:   How   about   its “elements”? I: That is simple. Tone, movement, form, word, action, color—anything a work of art can be made from. THE   CREATURE:   How   would   you   apply “orderly   and   measurable   changes”   to colors on canvas? I:   Take   Gainsborough’s   “Blue   Boy”.   The dominating   color   is   blue.   It   varies   an infinite number of times. Each time the change   is   clean   cut   and   almost RHYTHM 103

imperceptible.   It   is   orderly.   Countless copyists   have   tried   to measure   the amount of indigo in each change. They generally fail, but that does not mean that it is immeasurable, because it was done once. THE CREATURE: Continue with the same example. How does the change in blues “stimulate progressively the attention of the spectator”? I: Simply by arousing his curiosity to look at that which is   not   blue. THE CREATURE: You mean… I:   …the   pale   and   refined   yellowish-pink face of the “Blue Boy”. THE CREATURE: True. And at the same time   it   “points   to   the   final   aim   of   the artist”, that same boy’s s face. I:   Must   you   run   ahead   of   me   to   the conclusion? THE CREATURE: I wouldn’t be a woman if I didn’t love to have the last word. I: The least I can do is to make you believe you have it. THE CREATURE: What do you mean by “make me believe”? I: I have not told you all about Rhythm yet. THE CREATURE: Oh, that is all right. That only   means   I’ll   have   many   more   last words. I: Let us hope so. THE CREATURE: I am sure of it. And to prove it to you I will even have a few   first  words. Here is one. While I was working in the theatre—legitimate theatre, mind 104 THE SIXTH LESSON

you—in   stock   companies   and   on Broadway,   I   found   that   old   reliable “Tempo” very helpful. You abused it a few minutes ago. As a matter of fact, it saved me   many   times   when   I   did   not   know what to do…. I:   (Oh, how pleased I am!)   Yes—exactly— when you did not know what to do! You just   sped   over   the   embarrassing moments   until   you   knew   what   to   do. Marvelous!   I   have   seen   performances when   actors   apparently   never   had   an idea what to do because all the elements I   could   discover   in   three   acts   were “Tempo”   and   that   other   savior   of embarrassing moments, “Intonation”.   (I pat her on the shoulder humorously.)   My dear friend, stick to last words. THE CREATURE: You are horrid. In stock, the   poor   actor   often   has   no   time   or opportunity to find out what to do. I:   Let   him   not   lie.   Let   him   sketch   the situation   lightly.   Let   him   glide   over   it truthfully—then he may, on the spur of the   moment,   discover   what   to   do. Such things   happen   in   life.   You   meet somebody you did not know was in town and whom you do not want to meet, and spontaneously you start to act. You get your cue and you answer. After all, that is   what   the   author   wants   from   you. Spontaneous answers to his cues. THE CREATURE: But where does one get that spontaneity? RHYTHM 105

I: In a developed sense of Rhythm. Not from Tempo,   surely,   which   means   slow, medium, fast. That is far too limited. On the other hand, Rhythm has an endless, eternal swing. All created things live by Rhythm,   by   a   transition   from   one definite   thing   to   another   greater   one. Take this speech, for instance: “You   lie,   in   faith;   for   you   are   call’d plain Kate, And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst; But,   Kate,   the   prettiest   Kate   in Christendom, Kate   of   Kate-Hall,   my   super-dainty Kate, For   dainties   are   all   cates;   and therefore, Kate, Take   this   of   me,   Kate   of   my consolation;— Hearing   thy   mildness   prais’d   cl   in every town, Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,— Yet not so deeply as to thee belong,— Myself am mov’d to woo thee for my wife.” And this, as you well know, is   The Taming of the   Shrew —Act II, Scene I. This speech can   be   the   most   deadly,   monotonous affair,   delivered   by   an   actor   without   a sense   of   Rhythm.   And   speed   or   Tempo 106 THE SIXTH LESSON

won’t   save   him.   The   faster   he   goes—the duller he will sound. But I have heard this speech spoken by an actor who knew the value of “changes” from “plain” to “bonny”; from “curst” to “prettiest”; from “Kate-Hall” to “superdainty”; and so forth. I assure you I never heard a shorter speech in my life. It was an avalanche of changes; a dose of admiration—which   is   the   shortest measurable time in the theatre. The most brilliant   test   of   the   difference   between “Tempo” and “Rhythm” is the first soliloquy of Claudius in   Hamlet,   which begins: “O,   my   offence   is   rank,   it   smells   to heaven; It hath the primal eldest curse upon’t, — A brother’s murder!—Pray can I not, Though inclination be as sharp as will: My   stronger   guilt   defeats   my   strong intent; And,   like   a   man   to   double   business bound, I   stand   in   pause   where   I   shall   first begin, And both neglect” Study it sometime. Do you see now? THE   CREATURE:   I   see   one   thing.   More exercises are entering my busy day. I: Well, the last word is yours—what shall it be? RHYTHM 107

THE CREATURE: Anything that will enable me   to   “Stimulate   progressively   the attention of my spectators”. I: Bravo! You are a willing victim. In that case, the workout will be simple. For an actor, the business of acquiring a sense of Rhythm is a matter of giving himself up freely and entirely to any Rhythm he happens   to   encounter   in   life.   In   other words, not to be immune to the Rhythms which surround him. THE CREATURE: But to do that, one must know   and   realize   what   Rhythm   is. Suppose I am Rhythm-deaf or, will you say, unconscious? What should I do? I:   “To   a   nunnery,   go;   and   quickly   too. Farewell.” THE CREATURE: Oh, please—I really do think I have no sense of Rhythm. I: You are mistaken. There is not a stone in the universe without a sense of Rhythm. A few actors, maybe, but very few. Every normal   being   has   it.   Sometimes undeveloped, in a dormant state, true. But a little work will bring it forth. THE   CREATURE:   Don’t   torture   me   now. Tell me how. I: Do not hurry me. It is one of the hardest subjects   to   explain   because   it   is   so simple   and   universal.   A   child   is   born with   the   manifestation   of   Rhythm present. It breathes. A fair start which nature   provides   for   all.   After   that, development   follows.   First   in   walking, second in speech, third in emotions. One 108 THE SIXTH LESSON

step,   one   word,   one   emotion   changes into another and then another, each with the same allegiance, a final aim in view. This   is   the   first   level   of   Rhythm— consciousness. The second level arrives when   outside   forces   impose   their Rhythm on you. When you walk or move or gesture with or for others. When you walk in line; run to meet a friend; shake hands with an enemy. When your words answer other words; sweeping you with them   or   holding   you   still.   When   your emotions   are   the   direct   answer   and result of somebody else’s feelings. THE CREATURE: What is the third level? I:   When   you   command   and   create   your own   Rhythm   and   that   of   others.   It   is perfection. It is a result. Do not hurry to achieve it. The student must start with the second level. He must not do much at the start. All that is required of him is to notice these manifestations in real life and store them away in his brain. Special attention should be given to the results of different   Rhythms.   The   best   thing   to start   with   is   music,   where   Rhythm   is most   pronounced.   Go   to   a   concert;   a street organ, if you prefer, will do just as well. But listen to it with all your being, entirely relaxed and ready to be swept by the definite measures of the music. Give your-self up to the emotions it brings to you. Let them change with the changes in the music. Above all, be attentive and RHYTHM 109

flexible.   Follow   music   with   the   other arts, these with every-day occurrences. THE   CREATURE:   (In ecstasy, as always when she discovers that two and two are four.)   I   know   now.   That   is   what   has happened to me here, on this height. I gave   myself   up   entirely   to   the   terrific change of Rhythm performed so quickly, so masterfully. I:   So   impressively.   An   elephant   would stagger under the effect of that change. No great virtue for you. THE CREATURE: Very kind of you, dear Sir, but that is not going to be your last word.   Suppose   after   a   while   I   am sensitive to music? Where do I go? To what should I be sensitive next? I:   You   are   already   sensitive   to   a   trifling jump of some thousand feet in the air. THE CREATURE: Please! I: You are sensitive to the Rhythm of the New York streets. You nearly ran me out of breath. THE CREATURE: But I won’t be sensitive to your humor! It’s rather annoying. I: I am sorry to disappoint you again.   (I suspect   that   she   is   serious.)   You   are  sensitive   to   my   humor   because   you changed the strength of your voice; the speed   of   your   words;   the   amount   of demand in your request. You changed your Rhythm. THE   CREATURE:   One   day   I’ll   learn   to argue   with   you.   Please   tell   me:   what 110 THE SIXTH LESSON

shall I pay attention to after I respond to music freely and easily? I:   (She pleads so tenderly that I follow my own   recipe   and   change   my   Rhythm.   I take her by the hand and lead her   to the balustrade.)   Don’t look at me now, my dearest friend, look into space and listen with   your   inner   ear.   Music,   and   the other arts which follow naturally, will be only an open road to the whole of the universe.   Don’t   miss   anything   in   it. Listen to the waves of the sea. Absorb their sweeping change of time, with your body, brain, and soul. Talk to them as Demosthenes   did,   and   don’t   weaken after the first attempt. Let the meaning and   Rhythm   of   your   words   be   a continuation   of   their   eternal   sound. Inhale their spirit and feel at one with them, even for an instant. It will make you, in the future, able to portray the eternal parts of universal literature. Go through   the   same   experience   with woods,   fields,   rivers,   sky   above—then turn to the city and swing your spirit to its sound as you did to its creative rattle. Don’t   forget   the   quiet,   dreamy,   small towns—and above all, don’t forget your fellow men. Be sensitive to every change in the manifestation of their existence. Answer that change always with a new and higher level of your own Rhythm. This   is   the   secret   of   existence, perseverance and activity. This is what the world really is—from the stone up to RHYTHM 111

the   human   soul.   The   theatre   and   the actor enter this picture only as a part. But the actor cannot portray the whole if he does not become a part. THE   CREATURE:   (Very   thoughtfully   and sadly)   I am mortified. I: Why? THE   CREATURE:   Thinking   how   busy   I shall be for the next few months. I: Yes. But you will always know “what to do next”. Isn’t that a consolation? THE   CREATURE:   Rather!   My   regards   to “How”! Shall we go?  (We do. The elevator whisks us down. The street   swallows   us—and   we   change   our Rhythm.)  112 THE SIXTH LESSON
