The Method Acting Exercises Handbook 

The Method Acting Exercises Handbook is a concise and practical guide to the acting exercises originally devised by Lee Strasberg, one of the Method’s fore- most practitioners. The Method trains the imagination, concentration, senses and emotions to ‘re-create’ – not ‘imitate’ – logical and truthful behavior on stage, film and television. Building on her years of studying with Lee Strasberg and other Method Teach- ers and her significant and continuing teaching career, Lola Cohen details a series of specific exercises in order to provide clear instruction and guidance to this preeminent form of actor training. By integrating Strasberg’s voice with her own tried-and tested-style of teaching, Cohen demonstrates what can be gained from the exercises, how they can inform and inspire your learning, and how they might be applied to your acting and directing practice. As a companion to The Lee Strasberg Notes, a transcription of Strasberg’s own teaching, The Method Acting Exercises Handbook offers an unparalleled and updated guide to this world-renowned technique.  Lola Cohen   has thirty years of teaching internationally and at the Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute in New York and Los Angeles, as a member of the NYU Tisch Strasberg Studio faculty, NYC, as an Associate Adjunct Professor of Law at Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, NY, and as a guest lecturer at The American University, Washington, DC. She is the editor of The Lee Strasberg Notes (Routledge, 2010).  1   Lee Strasberg and Lola Cohen in class, Lee Stras- berg Theater and Film Institute New York, 1978. Photo by Sylvia Plachy.



The Method Acting Exercises Handbook  Lola Cohen  Edited by Matthew D. Rudikoff

First published 2017 by Routledge 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN and by Routledge 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor   & Francis Group, an informa business © 2017 Lola Cohen The right of Lola Cohen to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by her in accordance with sections   77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data Names: Cohen, Lola author. Title: The Method Acting Exercises Handbook / Lola Cohen. Description: Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY : Routledge, 2016. Identifiers: LCCN 2016014448 | ISBN 9780415750042 (hardback) | ISBN 9780415750059 (pbk.) | ISBN 9781315471495 (ebook) Subjects: LCSH: Method acting. | Acting. Classification: LCC PN2062 .C86 2016 | DDC 792.02/8—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016014448 ISBN: 978-0-415-75004-2 (hbk) ISBN: 978-0-415-75005-9 (pbk) ISBN: 978-1-315-47149-5 (ebk) Typeset in Calvert MT by Apex CoVantage, LLC

List of Figures   viii  Foreword: Marlon Brando on Lee Strasberg and the Heart of   The   Method   xi  Author’s Note and Acknowledgments   xiii  Introduction   2  Suggestions for Applying the Exercises   12  1.   Relaxation Exercise   16  About the Exercise   17  Exercise Instructions   20  2.   Foundation Sense Memory Exercises   26  Role of the Senses   27  About the Foundation Exercises   29  Exercise Descriptions   33  •   Breakfast Drink Exercise   33  •   Mirror/Make-Up/Shaving Exercise   36  •   Sharp Taste Exercise   40  •   Sharp Smell Exercise   42  •   Three (3) Pieces of Material Exercise   43  •   Taking off and Putting on Underclothes, Shoes, and Socks Exercise   45  •   Sunshine Exercise   47 Contents

vi   C ONTENTS  •   Sharp Pain Exercise   48  •   Sound Exercise   51  •   Overall Sensation Exercises   53     Shower and Bath Overall   56     Extreme Heat and Extreme Cold Overall   58     Strong Wind Overall   60     Drunk Overall   62  3.   Advanced Sense Memory Exercises   66  About the Exercises   67  Exercise Descriptions   67  •   Personal Object Exercise   67  •   Place Exercises   70     Guided Childhood Place   72     Childhood Room   74  •   Private Moment Exercise   78  •   Emotional Memory Exercise   83  •   Combining the Exercises   89  4.   Character Development   94  About Character Development   95  •   Working with the Script   96  •   Improvisation   99     Improvisation Notes   101  •   Character Guide   103  •   Method Acting Character Guide – Table 4.1   105  •   Spine   109  About the Character Exercises   112  Exercise Considerations   114  Exercise Descriptions   115

C ONTENTS   vii  •   Substitution Exercise   115  •   Need Exercise   119  •   Private Moment for the Character Exercise   129  •   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise   136  •   Animal Exercise and Guide   151  •   Animal Exercise Guide – Table 4.2   158  •   Music Exercise and Guide   162  •   Music Exercise Guide – Table 4.3   165  5.   Practical Use of the Work   170  Rehearsal Process   171  Auditions   174  Performance   177  6.   Developing the Actor’s Presence   180  Exercise Descriptions   181  •   Evolution Exercise (“Dance the Song of Your Life”)   181  •   Song and Dance Exercise   189     Part 1 – Song   189     Part 2 – Dance   191  7.   Directing and Teaching   194  Directing and The Method   195  Teaching The Method   204  Master Class Material   208  Master Class Public Performance/Showcase   211  Index   217

List of Figures  Cover photo   Lola Cohen on the stage of the Moscow Art Theater (MAT), Moscow, RU, 2015. Half title   Lee Strasberg and Lola Cohen in class, Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York, 1978. 0.1   Lee Strasberg, circa 1979. 0.2   Konstantin Sergeyevich Stanislavski. St.   Petersburg Theater Museum. 0.3   Konstantin Stanislavski and Vladimir Nemirovich- Danchenko. St.   Petersburg Theater Museum. 0.4   Yvegeny Vakhtangov, Actor/ Director, 1883–1922. 0.5   Vsevolod Meyerhold, Actor/ Director, 1874–1940. 0.6   Richard Boleslavsky in The Mistress of the Inn by Carlo Goldoni. Moscow Art Theater. Moscow, 1914. 0.7   Maria Ouspenskaya in Dodsworth, directed by William Wyler, 1936. 0.8   Moscow Art Theater, Yalta, 1900. 1.1   Relaxation Exercise, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK. 1.2   Relaxation Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 1.3   Testing for Relaxation, Theater High School Rødkilde, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK. 2.1   Abstract or Additional Movement, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 2.2   Breakfast Drink Exercise, Theater High School Rødkilde, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK. 2.3/2.4   Mirror/Make-Up/Shaving Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 2.5   Mirror/Make-Up/Shaving Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 2.6   Shower Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 3.1   Childhood Room Exercise, Act for All, Lisbon, PO. 3.2   Private Moment Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 3.3   Private Moment Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 3.4   Private Moment Exercise, Act for All, Lisbon, PO. 3.5   Private Moment Exercise, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK. 3.6   Private Moment Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 3.7   Emotional Memory Exercise, Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.1/4.2   Character Development, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.3   Stanislavski’s script analysis and notes of Chekhov’s The Cherry Orchard. 4.4   First reading of Chekhov’s The Seagull. Chekhov International Theater School, Melikhovo, RU. 4.5   Kim Stanley in Séance on a Wet Afternoon, 1964. 4.6   Need Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.7   Need Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.8   Need Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.9   Need Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.10   Need Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 4.11   Private Moment for the Character Exercise, Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York.  viii

ix LIST OF FIGURES 4.12   Private Moment for the Character Exercise, Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.13   Private Moment for the Character Exercise, Chekhov International Theater School, Melikhovo, RU. 4.14   Private Moment for the Character Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.15   Private Moment for the Character Exercise, Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.16   Private Moment for the Character Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 4.17   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.18   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.19   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.20   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.21   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.22   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.23   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.24   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.25   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.26   Painting/Sculpture/Photograph Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.27   Painting/Sculpture/ Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.28   Painting/Sculpture/ Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.29   Painting/Sculpture/ Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.30   Painting/Sculpture/ Photograph Exercise, Lee   Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. Color plate  The Netherlandish Proverbs, by Pieter Brueghel the Elder, 155bpk, Berlin, DE, Gemaeldegalerie, Staatliche Museen, Berlin, DE. 4.31   Painting Exercise Improvisation, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK. 4.32   Painting Exercise Improvisation, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.33   Painting Exercise Improvisation, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.34   Painting Exercise Improvisation, Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York. 4.35   Animal Exercise, Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 4.36   Animal Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 4.37   Animal Exercise, Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 4.38   Animal Exercise, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK. 5.1   Rehearsal of The Seagull on Chekhov’s porch. Chekhov International Theater School, Melikhovo, RU.

x   LIST OF FIGURES 6.1   Evolution Exercise (“Dance the Song of Your Life”), Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT. 6.2   Evolution Exercise (“Dance the Song of Your Life”), Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 6.3   Evolution Exercise (“Dance the Song of Your Life”), Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 7.1   The Group Theater, 1936. 7.2   Lee Strasberg and James Dean at the Actors Studio, 1955, New York. 7.3   Master Class Public Showcase,   Decameron Art Studio, Moscow, RU. 7.4   Danish National Film School Master Class Presentation, TELL to JOY Theater, Copenhagen, DK.

Foreword  Marlon Brando on Lee Strasberg and the Heart of The Method  “Acting – and living, and everything else, for that matter – is com- passion. What Lee and Stella [Adler] and Mira [Rostova] and Herbert [Berghof] were all espousing was compassion, an ampli- fication of humanity, which is all that will save a scene or a play or a relationship or the world. The world is so inordinately tiny – not geographically, but spiritually. We shuffle along, happy to do the least amount of work, the least amount of exploration, perhaps because we feel we don’t deserve all the riches that surround us. Movies and plays and art and music and interaction with other people who sought compassion and understanding saved me. They will save us all. What is at the heart of The Method is compas- sion, empathy. Go into your private moments and private spaces and realize all that you’ve felt and all that has been given to you and taken away. We will never murder; we might never give birth; we were not Napoleon. But within us are similar emotions, drives, feelings that can place us within an adjoining heart – of a mur- derer; of Napoleon. Of anyone. What the teachers were telling us – what Lee was telling his students – was to empathize with your own history and to merge with the histories of others. Art means nothing if it does not connect with an audience – even it might be an audience of one. An honesty with our emotions will find a con- nection with the honesty of someone else with their own emotions. Otherwise, it is performing, which is not to be confused with act- ing. Call it Method, call it acting, call it art – it is the painful, glorious compassion that joins us all, shared in one space at one time.” (Continued)  xi

xii   FOREWORD * * * * * * “His knowledge of the theater was vast – he was a walking ency- clopedia – and he traveled the world to see and to study what was done and what was good. Lee then shared this with his stu- dents, and almost anyone who asked him questions. This cannot be underestimated. Imagine yourself in, say, 1952, and you think you want to be an actor, and all you know about are the few pro- ductions you’ve done in high school or college – not to mention what you’ve seen on film – and you find yourself in the pres- ence of this man, who can tell you what the Russians, the French, the Italians are doing; who can quote virtually any playwright or critic or philosopher. That was valuable, and it was very cheap – often free – to attend the Studio. This cannot be discarded.” Interview conducted by James Grissom, 1990 © 2015 James Grissom

Author’s Note and Acknowledgments What this book stands for is in its content and practice. The reward is the surprise of self-discovery for your artistic process. I   was faced with a challenging legacy in presenting clear descriptions of The Method Exercises for future actors. I   give my heartfelt appreciation in memoriam to Lee Strasberg for sharing his extensive knowledge and experiences with his students in his mission to solve the problems of the actor. His groundbreaking work and his passion for all the arts has inspired generations of Method Actors. A debt of gratitude to my editor, Matthew D. Rudikoff, for his sus- tained encouragement and insights in the preparation of this manu- script during every stage. Special thanks to Anna Strasberg, Co-Founder and Artistic Director and Victoria Krane, President of the Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute for their commitment in keeping Lee Strasberg’s legacy avail- able for future generations of artists. To my editors at Routledge, Talia Rodgers, for her kindness, encouragement, and expertise and Stacey Walker and her staff for their support. To James Grissom, author and raconteur, for his wit, and prodigious knowledge of the theater, and for permitting me to use the Marlon Brando, Tennessee Williams and Kim Stanley quotes. To Judith A. Proffer, founder of Huqua Press and Peter McAllister of the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama for reading and commenting on chapters and their enthusiastic support and to Susan Brown, Ph.D., for her astute editorial insights. To my gifted colleagues: Victor Melnikov – Chekhov International Theater School, Melikhovo, RU and TELL to JOY Theater, Copenha- gen, DK; Alexandra Tomilina and Vasily Shevchenko – Decameron  xiii

xiv   A UTHOR ’ S   N OTE   AND   A CKNOWLEDGMENTS  Art Studio, Moscow, RU; Cristiano Violo and Stefano Saveriano –  Accademia Zero Nove, Milan, IT; Elsa Valentim – Escola de Actores, Lisbon, PO; Anait Ovchinnikova – Stanislavski House Museum, Mos- cow, RU; Kirill Krok – Vakhtangov State Academic Theater, Moscow, RU; Sergei Tcherkasski, St. Petersburg Theater Academy, St. Peters- burg, RU. To Bonnie Bruckheimer, Stanley Buchthal, Ellen Chenoweth, and Martha Frankel for their sage counsel and friendship; To Method actors and teachers – Hope Arthur, Bill Balzac, Hildy Brooks, Mauricio Bustamante, Tim Crouse, Juan Fernandez, Lindsey Ferrentino,   Marcia Haufrecht, Geoffrey Horne, Irma Sandrey, Marcel Simoneau, Gary Swanson, and Ted Zurkowski. To photgrapers, Tanya Kalinina and Emily Dionisio, Graphics and art consultant Robin Harvey and Valentina Mariucci – translator. My sincere thanks to the contributors of actor comments used in the Handbook – Anton Alekseev, Claire Alexander, Georgina Amour, Mar- garida Andre, Vic Bagratuni, Adam Bakri, Jessamine Bell Bliss, Joseph Blute, Giedre Bond, Chris Cramer, Mathilde Dehaye, Matthew Dipple, Paula Fredin, Anders Guld Jensen, Melania Gomez, Celine Held, Gihee Hong, Thais Kirby, Lily Koppel, Darla Krupnick, Luca Levi, Dimanche Melnikov, Sergey Mihaylovich, Martyna Peszko, Hudson Oznowicz, Andrew Rogers, Dan Shaked, Luke Smith, Ursula García Tonoco, Anastasia Slonina, Zhenya Surzhina, Kristina Svencionyte, Marianna Zabavina. My deep appreciation to the actors and actresses, too numerous to cite individually, whose photographs in the Handbook so artfully demonstrate The Method Exercises. And especially to my loving Cohen / Brown / Rudikoff family – for everything. Lola Cohen Woodstock, NY September,   2016



Introduction

I NTRODUCTION   3 The Method Acting Exercises Handbook is a practical guide to the exercises taught to me by Lee Strasberg during the last five years of his life when I   studied with him in New York and Los Angeles. These physical and emotional exercises will help you to achieve a level of excellence and truth in your acting. You will also expand, nurture, and train your imagination, the use of the senses, and your concentration. I   continued my training with Jose Quintero and Kim Stanley, incorpo- rating their ideas into my own work during my thirty years of teaching at the Institute and internationally – to further develop what Strasberg taught and shared with us about The Method and the exercises. Acting isn’t a solitary art, and it cannot be taught and absorbed from a book alone. My hope is that the Handbook can be used as an introduction to The Method, an accompaniment to your class work, and as a reference for planning future work. The specific descriptions, instructions, and photographs included are designed and offered for you to practice at home or to supplement whatever you are working on in your classes. Regardless of whether you are investigating a specific character, interpreting a script, or developing a precise vision for a production, this book is a shared experience – for actors, teachers, and directors who want to explore if working with The Method and the exercises can help perfect their craft and refine their work. The exercises are procedures for activating each of your senses, one by one, in detailed explorations of imagined objects, people, activities, and places. This conscious, sensory process demands concentration and focus. It is a technique to access feelings and behaviors for your characters. Everything offered here honors Strasberg’s philosophy of training your mind, body, and senses in an effort to create a truthful presence on the stage. Strasberg told his students that he believed that being truthful isn’t a state achieved by discussion or by a description from an instructor or director. He told us that actors must understand their own nature and how to respond sensorially before transforming into a char- acter. He used the word sensorially to convey the necessity of experi- encing life, the world, people, and objects through the five senses: what you see, smell, hear, touch, and taste. The time and intensity devoted to practicing the exercises trains your concentration and will by utilizing the all-powerful senses to act as gateways to feelings, behaviors, and responses. By re-living sensory experiences when creating a role, the

4   I NTRODUCTION  actor can gain the capacity to fully breathe life – their own and that perceived by the playwright – into the character. As you move forward in your work, characters will emerge organically and unanticipated. Each of these exercises will act as a catalyst for you to discover dif- ferent sides of your personality, as well as to initiate new and original ideas that ultimately lead to thinking and behaving like the character. The dynamic is initiated internally. Memories experienced through the five senses will shake your subconscious mind, bringing impulses to the surface. These personal memories triggered through the exer- cises, where you explore events, places, and people from your own life, ignite your creativity – offering up a limitless range of feelings, actions, behaviors, and gestures needed for your character. The actor must choose those exercises that give the intensity of feeling called for in a scene. Cultivating your intuitive mind and your emotional intelligence will result in an elevated sense of belief in what you’re doing. Ultimately, the   exercises make it possible for you to experience and re-experience every conceivable combination of traits, habits, feelings, and actions at will. One of the greatest gifts you can possess is the ability to switch effortlessly, moment to moment or comedy to drama, for example, as well as remembering the behavior, dialogue, and cues for a scene. This entails discipline and intellectual control.   Having this ability – switching from one extreme to another effortlessly – will con- tribute many unexpected moments that touch audiences deeply. To prepare for the creation of any role, either in a class or in a perfor- mance, you must do the Relaxation Exercise detailed in Chapter One. Strasberg called relaxation and concentration the “two sides of the acting coin.” The many demands made upon the actor throughout a performance call for the elimination of fear and tension, and Strasberg believed that actors must relax their bodies in order to concentrate and have control over their minds. As you regularly work on the Relaxation Exercise, you will find that your concentration and your will are solidified to enable you to relax and stay relaxed. Stanislavksi said that relaxation is the emotional and physical state required to enter into what he called the “creative mood.” It is in this mood that great acting is achieved. Relaxation allows for fluidity, seamlessness, focus on the task at hand, and the merging of action and awareness which are essential conditions for good acting.

I NTRODUCTION   5 The Foundation Sense Memory Exercises described in Chapter Two adhere to the same sequence that Strasberg followed in his classes and which I   continue in my classes – moving from simple to more complex tasks. Initially, you practice non-emotional and basic daily  0.1   Lee Strasberg, circa 1979. Courtesy Photofest.  0.2   Konstantin Sergeyevich Stanislavski. St.   Petersburg Theater Museum.

6   I NTRODUCTION  activities and situations, such as having a breakfast drink or looking in the mirror and putting on make-up or shaving. The sequencing pro- gresses with the more physical exercises called Overall Sensations, which require active movement and are an “all-over” or enveloping experience and might include taking a shower or bath, responding to weather conditions such as extreme cold and heat, rain, or strong wind, or the disorienting condition of being drunk. This series of exer- cises trains you to engage areas of the body that are often ignored or which you might not even be conscious of. The Foundation Sense Memory Exercises aren’t for the purpose of evoking emotional responses, but to activate and train your imagina- tion and the individual senses for optimal use. It’s natural that real and potentially strong emotions may unexpectedly bubble up during the exercises, but you are not to go along with those emotions. In the course of doing these exercises, be aware of the feelings that do arise and note the senses that triggered the emotion. This will be placed in your acting inventory, but let it go and continue with your work. Once you have a good grasp of the Foundation Exercises, you will move on to the more Advanced Sense Memory Exercises, found in Chapter Three, including Personal Objects, Place Exercise, Private Moment Exercise, and, the jewel in the crown, the Emotional Memory Exercise, which has tremendous value in the area of repetition and intensity of emotion. Eventually, you will perform multiple exercises simultaneously, learn- ing to do what is known as “Combinations.” Divergent activities and behaviors will train and strengthen your will and stimulate a level of acute awareness. The complexity of the exercises will increase as we focus on the Script and Character Development described in Chapter Four. This area of development includes   Improvisation, Spines, Substi- tution, Need, Private Moment for the Character, Painting, Animal, and Music Exercises. To help you understand and use the exercises, I   include several guides to incite a keener sense of detail by giving you examples of sensory observations that can expand the boundaries of your imagination – a state that leads you to dig deeper into the charac- ter’s world. The guides will inspire you to reach beyond ingrained habits,   stereotypes,   and   self-limiting   beliefs,   helping   you   play characters unlike yourself and to discover your own individual strengths by developing a strong sensory life.

I NTRODUCTION   7 You need to connect with your scene partners on stage and listen, letting their responses affect what you feel, think, and how you react – not just relying on your memorized lines or behaviors. To strengthen this interconnectedness, I’ve introduced the process of Improvisation into several of the exercises. In Painting, Animal, and Private Moment for the Character Exercise, the improvisations force you to respond to the other actors, verbally and nonverbally. The technique of Improvi- sation is also used with some of the other exercises to further assist you in overcoming your limitations. Lee Strasberg told his classes that he formulated his ideas in response to the great Russian director and actor Konstantin Sergeyevich Stan- islavski, co-founder with Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko of the Mos- cow Art Theater (MAT), Yevgeny Vakhtangov, visionary actor/director, member of the MAT known for “Fantastic Realism” and founder of his own theater, and Vsevolod Meyerhold, prolific actor/director, member of the MAT, who created his own acting system called “Biomechanics.” Both Meyerhold and Vakhtangov were students of Stanislavski and Nemirovich-Danchenko. Strasberg learned the Stanislavski “System” from Richard Boleslavsky and Maria Ouspenskaya, esteemed MAT actors who immigrated to New York City and formed the American Laboratory Theater where Strasberg eventually enrolled. Although the lives of Strasberg and Stanislavski overlapped, they never met. They were kindred spirits who shared a heartfelt immersion into the world of art and the mystery of creativity.  0.3   Konstantin Stanislavski and Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko. St.   Petersburg Theater Museum.

8   I NTRODUCTION  0.4   Yvegeny Vakhtangov, Russian actor/director (1883–1922) after whom the Vakhtangov State Theater is named.  0.5   Vsevolod Meyerhold, Russian actor/director (1874–1940). Courtesy HIP/Art Resource, New York.

I NTRODUCTION   9  0.8   Moscow Art Theater, Yalta, 1900, including most notably – standing in the rear on the extreme right is writer Ivan Bunin, third to his right is Maxim Gorky, second to his right is Anton Chekhov, to his right is writer Alexander Kuprin, to his right is Konstantin Stanislavski and second to his right in a top hat in front of three women is Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko. Seated second to Danchenko’s left in front of Stanislavski is Stanislavski’s wife, Lilina, seated second to her left is Olga Knipper-Chekhova, to her left is the actress Margarita Savitskaya, and seated on the ground in front of them is Vsevolod Meyerhold.  0.6   Richard Boleslavsky in The Mistress of the Inn by Carlo Goldoni. MAT. Photo by K. Fisher. Moscow, 1914.  0.7   Maria Ouspenskaya in Dodsworth, directed by William Wyler. 1936. Courtesy United/ Photofest.
